<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 2</h2>
<p id="n450021"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n450021">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Rom 2:1-29</i> presents unusual difficulties for the interpreter. There have been several major approaches to the chapter and the group(s) it refers to: (1) Rom 2:14 refers to Gentile Christians, not Gentiles who obey the Jewish law. (2) Paul in Rom 2 is presenting a hypothetical viewpoint: If anyone could obey the law, that person would be justified, but no one can. (3) The reference to “the ones who do the law” in 2:13 are those who “do” the law in the right way, on the basis of faith, not according to Jewish legalism. (4) Rom 2:13 only speaks about Christians being judged in the future, along with such texts as Rom 14:10 and 2 Cor 5:10. (5) Paul’s material in Rom 2 is drawn heavily from Diaspora Judaism, so that the treatment of the law presented here cannot be harmonized with other things Paul says about the law elsewhere (E. P. Sanders, <i>Paul, the Law, and the Jewish People</i>, 123); another who sees Rom 2 as an example of Paul’s inconsistency in his treatment of the law is H. Räisänen, <i>Paul and the Law</i> [WUNT], 101-9. (6) The list of blessings and curses in Deut 27-30 provide the background for Rom 2; the Gentiles of 2:14 are Gentile Christians, but the condemnation of Jews in 2:17-24 addresses the failure of Jews as a nation to keep the law as a whole (A. Ito, “Romans 2: A Deuteronomistic Reading,” <i>JSNT</i> 59 [1995]: 21-37).</p></p>
<p id="n450022"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n450022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Some interpreters (e.g., C. K. Barrett, <i>Romans</i> [HNTC], 43) connect the inferential <span class="greek">Διό</span> (<span class="translit">dio</span>, “therefore”) with 1:32a, treating 1:32b as a parenthetical comment by Paul.</p></p>
<p id="n450023"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n450023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “you have nothing to say in your own defense” (so translated by TCNT).</p></p>
<p id="n450024"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n450024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O man.”</p></p>
<p id="n450025"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n450025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Therefore, you are without excuse, O man, everyone [of you] who judges.”</p></p>
<p id="n450026"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n450026">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in/by (that) which.”</p></p>
<p id="n450027"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n450027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “based on truth.”</p></p>
<p id="n450028"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n450028">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do you think this,” referring to the clause in v. 3b.</p></p>
<p id="n450029"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n450029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O man, the one who judges.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500210"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and do them.” The other words are supplied to bring out the contrast implied in this clause.</p></p>
<p id="n4500211"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “being unaware.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500212"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hardness.” Concerning this imagery, see Jer 4:4; Ezek 3:7; <i>1 En</i>. 16:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4500213"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500214"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” The relative pronoun was converted to a personal pronoun and, because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4500215"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will render,” “will recompense.” In this context Paul is setting up a hypothetical situation, not stating that salvation is by works.</p></p>
<p id="n4500216"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500216">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 62:12; Prov 24:12; a close approximation to Matt 16:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4500217"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> This contrast is clearer and stronger in Greek than can be easily expressed in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4500218"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those who [are] from selfish ambition.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500219"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “are persuaded by, obey.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500220"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> No verb is expressed in this verse, but the verb “to be” is implied by the Greek construction. Literally “suffering and distress on everyone…”</p></p>
<p id="n4500221"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “every soul of man.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500222"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500222">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul uses the term <i>Greek</i> here and in v. 10 to refer to non-Jews, i.e., Gentiles.</p></p>
<p id="n4500223"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but even,” to emphasize the contrast. The second word has been omitted since it is somewhat redundant in English idiom.</p></p>
<p id="n4500224"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500224">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is the first occurrence of <i>law</i> (<span class="translit">nomos</span>) in Romans. Exactly what Paul means by the term has been the subject of much scholarly debate. According to J. A. Fitzmyer (<i>Romans</i> [AB], 131-35; 305-6) there are at least four different senses: (1) figurative, as a “principle”; (2) generic, meaning “a law”; (3) as a reference to the OT or some part of the OT; and (4) as a reference to the Mosaic law. This last usage constitutes the majority of Paul’s references to “law” in Romans.</p></p>
<p id="n4500225"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek sentence expresses this contrast more succinctly than is possible in English. <i>Grk</i> “For not the hearers of the law are righteous before God, but the doers of the law will be declared righteous.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500226"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500226">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Gentile</i> is a NT term for a non-Jew.</p></p>
<p id="n4500227"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Some (e.g. C. E. B. Cranfield, <i>Romans</i> [ICC], 1:135-37) take the phrase <span class="greek">φύσει</span> (<span class="translit">phusei</span>, “by nature”) to go with the preceding “do not have the law,” thus: “the Gentiles who do not have the law by nature,” that is, by virtue of not being born Jewish.</p></p>
<p id="n4500228"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do by nature the things of the law.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500229"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” The relative pronoun was converted to a personal pronoun and, because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4500230"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “show the work of the law [to be] written,” with the words in brackets implied by the Greek construction.</p></p>
<p id="n4500231"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “excuse.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500232"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “their conscience bearing witness and between the thoughts accusing or also defending one another.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500233"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The form of the Greek word is either present or future, but it is best to translate in future because of the context of future judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n4500234"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of people.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500235"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500235">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>my gospel</i> cf. Rom 16:25; 2 Tim 2:8.</p></p>
<p id="n4500236"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500236">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>law</i> refers to the Mosaic law, described mainly in the OT books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy.</p></p>
<p id="n4500237"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “boast in God.” This may be an allusion to Jer 9:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4500238"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the will.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500239"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because of being instructed out of the law.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500240"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500240">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb is parallel to the verbs in vv. 17-18a, so it shares the conditional meaning even though the word “if” is not repeated.</p></p>
<p id="n4500241"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The structure of vv. 21-24 is difficult. Some take these verses as the apodosis of the conditional clauses (protases) in vv. 17-20; others see vv. 17-20 as an instance of anacoluthon (a broken off or incomplete construction).</p></p>
<p id="n4500242"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “detest.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500243"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500243">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 52:5.</p></p>
<p id="n4500244"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500244">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Circumcision</i> refers to male circumcision as prescribed in the OT, which was given as a covenant to Abraham in Gen 17:10-14. Its importance for Judaism can hardly be overstated: According to J. D. G. Dunn (<i>Romans</i> [WBC], 1:120) it was the “single clearest distinguishing feature of the covenant people.” J. Marcus has suggested that the terms used for circumcision (<span class="greek">περιτομή</span>, <span class="translit">peritomē</span>) and uncircumcision (<span class="greek">ἀκροβυστία</span>, <span class="translit">akrobustia</span>) were probably derogatory slogans used by Jews and Gentiles to describe their opponents (“The Circumcision and the Uncircumcision in Rome,” <i>NTS</i> 35 [1989]: 77-80).</p></p>
<p id="n4500245"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> This contrast is clearer and stronger in Greek than can be easily expressed in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4500246"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if you should be a transgressor of the law.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500247"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500247">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">φυλάσσω</span> (<span class="translit">phulassō</span>, traditionally translated “keep”) in this context connotes preservation of and devotion to an object as well as obedience.</p></p>
<p id="n4500248"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the uncircumcision by nature.” The word “man” is supplied here to make clear that male circumcision (or uncircumcision) is in view.</p></p>
<p id="n4500249"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500249">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “through,” but here the preposition seems to mean “(along) with,” “though provided with,” as BDAG 224 s.v. <span class="greek">διά</span> A.3.c indicates.</p></p>
<p id="n4500250"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500250">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “written code.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500251"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500251">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>circumcision is of the heart</i> see Lev 26:41; Deut 10:16; Jer 4:4; Ezek 44:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4500252"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500252">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Some have taken the phrase <span class="greek">ἐν πνεύματι</span> (<span class="translit">en pneumati</span>, “by/in [the] S/spirit”) not as a reference to the Holy Spirit, but referring to circumcision as “spiritual and not literal” (RSV).</p></p>
<p id="n4500253"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500253">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “written code.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500254"><a href="file1093.xhtml#n4500254">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whose.” The relative pronoun has been replaced by the phrase “this person’s” and, because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started in the translation.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
