<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Hebrews 3</h2>
<p id="n580031"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n580031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n580032"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n580032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of our confession.”</p></p>
<p id="n580033"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n580033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; in the translation the referent (God) has been specified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n580034"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n580034">4</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The reading adopted by the translation follows a few early <span class="smcaps">mss</span> and some versions (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>13,46vid</sup> B vg<sup>ms</sup> co Ambr). The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0243 0278 33 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy) insert “all” (“in all his house”), apparently in anticipation of Heb 3:5 which quotes directly from Num 12:7. On balance, the omission better explains the rise of <span class="greek">ὅλῳ</span> (<span class="translit">holō</span>, “all”) than vice versa. NA<sup>28</sup> puts <span class="greek">ὅλῳ</span> in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n580035"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n580035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; in the translation the referent (God) has been specified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n580036"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n580036">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Num 12:7.</p></p>
<p id="n580037"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n580037">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek makes the contrast between v. 5 and v. 6a more emphatic and explicit than is easily done in English.</p></p>
<p id="n580038"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n580038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; in the translation the referent (God) has been specified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n580039"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n580039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whose house we are,” continuing the previous sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n5800310"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800310">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading adopted by the translation is found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>13,46</sup> B sa, while the vast majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0243 0278 33 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt) add <span class="greek">μέχρι τέλους βεβαίαν</span> (<span class="translit">mechri telous bebaian</span>, “secure until the end”). The external evidence for the omission, though minimal, has excellent credentials. Considering the internal factors, B. M. Metzger (<i>TCGNT</i> 595) finds it surprising that the feminine adjective <span class="greek">βεβαίαν</span> should modify the neuter noun <span class="greek">καύχημα</span> (<span class="translit">kauchēma</span>, here translated “we take pride”), a fact that suggests that even the form of the word was borrowed from another place. Since the same phrase occurs at Heb 3:14, it is likely that later scribes added it here at Heb 3:6 in anticipation of Heb 3:14. While these words belong at 3:14, they seem foreign to 3:6. </p></p>
<p id="n5800311"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the pride of our hope.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800312"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800312">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> The following quotation is from Ps 95:7b-11.</p></p>
<p id="n5800313"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “today if you hear his voice.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800314"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “tested me by trial.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800315"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they are wandering in the heart.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800316"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if they shall enter my rest,” a Hebrew idiom expressing an oath that something will certainly not happen.</p></p>
<p id="n5800317"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “take care.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800318"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n5800319"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that there not be in any of you.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800320"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “deserts,” “rebels against.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800321"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in forsaking the living God.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800322"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the beginning of the confidence.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800323"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “while it is said.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800324"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “today if you hear his voice.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800325"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800325">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 95:7b-8.</p></p>
<p id="n5800326"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “through Moses.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800327"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; in the translation the referent (God) has been specified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5800328"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800328">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to God’s judgment pronounced in Num 14:29, 32.</p></p>
<p id="n5800329"><a href="file1194.xhtml#n5800329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “So” to indicate a summary or conclusion to the argument of the preceding paragraph.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
