<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 22</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 22</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Wedding Banquet </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:1</span> Jesus spoke<sup><a id="n400221" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n400221">1</a></sup> to them again in parables, saying: <span class="verse">22:2</span> “The kingdom of heaven can be compared to a king who gave a wedding banquet for his son. <span class="verse">22:3</span> He sent his slaves<sup><a id="n400222" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n400222">2</a></sup> to summon those who had been invited to the banquet, but they would not come. <span class="verse">22:4</span> Again he sent other slaves, saying, ‘Tell those who have been invited, “Look! The feast I have prepared for you is ready.<sup><a id="n400223" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n400223">3</a></sup> My oxen and fattened cattle have been slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding banquet.”’ <span class="verse">22:5</span> But they were indifferent and went away, one to his farm, another to his business. <span class="verse">22:6</span> The<sup><a id="n400224" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n400224">4</a></sup> rest seized his slaves, insolently mistreated them, and killed them. <span class="verse">22:7</span> The<sup><a id="n400225" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n400225">5</a></sup> king was furious! He sent his soldiers, and they put those murderers to death<sup><a id="n400226" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n400226">6</a></sup> and set their city<sup><a id="n400227" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n400227">7</a></sup> on fire. <span class="verse">22:8</span> Then he said to his slaves, ‘The wedding is ready, but the ones who had been invited were not worthy. <span class="verse">22:9</span> So go into the main streets and invite everyone you find to the wedding banquet.’ <span class="verse">22:10</span> And those slaves went out into the streets and gathered all they found, both bad and good, and the wedding hall was filled with guests. <span class="verse">22:11</span> But when the king came in to see the wedding guests, he saw a man there who was not wearing wedding clothes. <span class="verse">22:12</span> And he said to him, ‘Friend, how did you get in here without wedding clothes?’ But he had nothing to say.<sup><a id="n400228" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n400228">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:13</span> Then the king said to his attendants, ‘Tie him up hand and foot and throw him into the outer darkness,<sup><a id="n400229" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n400229">9</a></sup> where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth!’ <span class="verse">22:14</span> For many are called, but few are chosen.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paying Taxes to Caesar </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:15</span> Then the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4002210" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002210">10</a></sup> went out and planned together to entrap him with his own words.<sup><a id="n4002211" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002211">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:16</span> They sent to him their disciples along with the Herodians,<sup><a id="n4002212" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002212">12</a></sup> saying, “Teacher, we know that you are truthful, and teach the way of God in accordance with the truth.<sup><a id="n4002213" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002213">13</a></sup> You do not court anyone’s favor because you show no partiality.<sup><a id="n4002214" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002214">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:17</span> Tell us then, what do you think? Is it right<sup><a id="n4002215" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002215">15</a></sup> to pay taxes<sup><a id="n4002216" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002216">16</a></sup> to Caesar<sup><a id="n4002217" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002217">17</a></sup> or not?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:18</span> But Jesus realized their evil intentions and said, “Hypocrites! Why are you testing me? <span class="verse">22:19</span> Show me the coin used for the tax.” So<sup><a id="n4002218" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002218">18</a></sup> they brought him a denarius.<sup><a id="n4002219" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002219">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:20</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4002220" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002220">20</a></sup> said to them, “Whose image<sup><a id="n4002221" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002221">21</a></sup> is this, and whose inscription?” <span class="verse">22:21</span> They replied,<sup><a id="n4002222" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002222">22</a></sup> “Caesar’s.” He said to them,<sup><a id="n4002223" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002223">23</a></sup> “Then give to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.”<sup><a id="n4002224" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002224">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:22</span> Now when they heard this they were stunned,<sup><a id="n4002225" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002225">25</a></sup> and they left him and went away. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Marriage and the Resurrection</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:23</span> The same day Sadducees<sup><a id="n4002226" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002226">26</a></sup> (who say there is no resurrection)<sup><a id="n4002227" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002227">27</a></sup> came to him and asked him,<sup><a id="n4002228" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002228">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:24</span> “Teacher, Moses said, ‘<b><i>If a man dies without having children, his brother must marry the widow and father children</i></b><sup><a id="n4002229" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002229">29</a></sup> <b><i>for his brother</i></b>.’<sup><a id="n4002230" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002230">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:25</span> Now there were seven brothers among us. The first one married and died, and since he had no children he left his wife to his brother. <span class="verse">22:26</span> The second did the same, and the third, down to the seventh. <span class="verse">22:27</span> Last<sup><a id="n4002231" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002231">31</a></sup> of all, the woman died. <span class="verse">22:28</span> In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife of the seven will she be? For they all had married her.”<sup><a id="n4002232" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002232">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:29</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4002233" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002233">33</a></sup> answered them, “You are deceived,<sup><a id="n4002234" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002234">34</a></sup> because you don’t know the scriptures or the power of God. <span class="verse">22:30</span> For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels<sup><a id="n4002235" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002235">35</a></sup> in heaven. <span class="verse">22:31</span> Now as for the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was spoken to you by God,<sup><a id="n4002236" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002236">36</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:32</span> ‘<b><i>I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob</i></b>’?<sup><a id="n4002237" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002237">37</a></sup> He is not the God of the dead but of the living!”<sup><a id="n4002238" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002238">38</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:33</span> When the crowds heard this, they were amazed at his teaching. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Greatest Commandment </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:34</span> Now when the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4002239" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002239">39</a></sup> heard that he had silenced the Sadducees,<sup><a id="n4002240" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002240">40</a></sup> they assembled together.<sup><a id="n4002241" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002241">41</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:35</span> And one of them, an expert in religious law,<sup><a id="n4002242" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002242">42</a></sup> asked him a question to test<sup><a id="n4002243" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002243">43</a></sup> him: <span class="verse">22:36</span> “Teacher, which commandment in the law is the greatest?”<sup><a id="n4002244" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002244">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:37</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4002245" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002245">45</a></sup> said to him, “‘<b><i>Love</i></b><sup><a id="n4002246" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002246">46</a></sup> <b><i>the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind</i></b>.’<sup><a id="n4002247" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002247">47</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:38</span> This is the first and greatest<sup><a id="n4002248" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002248">48</a></sup> commandment. <span class="verse">22:39</span> The second is like it: ‘<b><i>Love your neighbor as yourself</i></b>.’<sup><a id="n4002249" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002249">49</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:40</span> All the law and the prophets depend<sup><a id="n4002250" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002250">50</a></sup> on these two commandments.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Messiah: David’s Son and Lord </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:41</span> While<sup><a id="n4002251" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002251">51</a></sup> the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4002252" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002252">52</a></sup> were assembled, Jesus asked them a question:<sup><a id="n4002253" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002253">53</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:42</span> “What do you think about the Christ?<sup><a id="n4002254" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002254">54</a></sup> Whose son is he?” They said, “The son of David.”<sup><a id="n4002255" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002255">55</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:43</span> He said to them, “How then does David by the Spirit call him ‘Lord,’ saying, </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">22:44</span> ‘<b><i>The Lord said to my lord,</i></b><sup><a id="n4002256" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002256">56</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<b><i>Sit at my right hand,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>until I put your enemies under your feet</i></b>”’?<sup><a id="n4002257" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002257">57</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodyblock"><span class="verse">22:45</span> If David then calls him ‘Lord,’ how can he be his son?”<sup><a id="n4002258" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002258">58</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:46</span> No one<sup><a id="n4002259" href="file991_notes.xhtml#n4002259">59</a></sup> was able to answer him a word, and from that day on no one dared to question him any longer. </p>

</body>
</html>