<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 2</h2>
<p id="n460021"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n460021">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and I, when I came.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">κἀγώ</span> (<span class="translit">kagō</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n460022"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n460022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n460023"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n460023">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ A few significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A C as well as some versions and fathers) read <span class="greek">μυστήριον</span> (<span class="translit">mustērion</span>, “mystery”) instead of <span class="greek">μαρτύριον</span> (<span class="translit">marturion</span>, “testimony”). But the latter has wider ms support (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> B D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> and some versions), though not quite as impressive. <span class="greek">μαρτύριον</span> may have been changed by scribes in anticipation of Paul’s words in 2:7, or conversely, <span class="greek">μυστήριον</span> may have been changed to conform to 1:6. Transcriptionally, since “the mystery of God/Christ” is a well-worn expression in the <i>corpus Paulinum</i> (1 Cor 2:7; 4:1; Eph 3:4; Col 2:2; 4:3), while “testimony of Christ” occurs in Paul only once (1 Cor 1:6, though “testimony of the Lord” appears in 2 Tim 1:8), and “testimony of God” never, it is likely that scribes changed the text to the more usual expression. A decision is difficult in this instance, but a slight preference should be given to <span class="greek">μαρτύριον</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n460024"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n460024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to know nothing.”</p></p>
<p id="n460025"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n460025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> In extrabiblical literature this word was applied to an initiate of a mystery religion (BDAG 995 s.v. <span class="greek">τέλειος</span> 3, gives numerous examples and states this was a technical term of the mystery religions). It could here refer to those who believed Paul’s message, the mystery of God (v. 1), and so be translated as “those who believe God’s message.”</p></p>
<p id="n460026"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n460026">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “entered the heart,” an OT expression, in which the heart functions like the mind.</p></p>
<p id="n460027"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n460027">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 64:4.</p></p>
<p id="n460028"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n460028">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “combining spiritual things with spiritual words” (i.e., words the Spirit gives, as just described).</p></p>
<p id="n460029"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n460029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “natural person.” Cf. BDAG 1100 s.v. <span class="greek">ψυχικός</span> a, “an unspiritual pers., one who merely functions bodily, without being touched by the Spirit of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600210"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n4600210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “evaluates.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600211"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n4600211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is evaluated” (i.e., “is subject to evaluation”); <i>Grk</i> “he himself is discerned,” that is, the person without the Spirit does not understand the person with the Spirit, particularly in relation to the life of faith.</p></p>
<p id="n4600212"><a href="file1110.xhtml#n4600212">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 40:13.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
