<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 20</h2>
<p id="n660201"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n660201">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660202"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n660202">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The two clauses “having/holding the key of the abyss” and “a huge chain in his hand” can be construed in two ways: (1) both are controlled by the participle <span class="greek">ἔχοντα</span> (<span class="translit">echonta</span>) and both are modified by the phrase “in his hand”—“having in his hand the key to the abyss and a huge chain.” (2) The participle <span class="greek">ἔχοντα</span> refers only to the key, and the phrase “in his hand” refers only to the chain—“having the key of the abyss and holding a huge chain in his hand.” Because of the stylistic tendency in Rev to use the verb <span class="greek">ἔχω</span> (<span class="translit">echō</span>) to mean “hold (something)” and the phrase “in his hand” forming a “bracket” along with the verb <span class="greek">ἔχω</span> around both the phrases in question, the first option is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n660203"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n660203">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n660204"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n660204">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the angel introduced in v. 1) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n660205"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n660205">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660206"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n660206">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and shut.” While the lexical force of the term is closer to “shut,” it is acceptable to render the verb <span class="greek">ἔκλεισεν</span> (<span class="translit">ekleisen</span>) as “locked” here in view of the mention of the key in the previous verse.</p></p>
<p id="n660207"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n660207">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660208"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n660208">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I saw thrones, and those seated on them, and judgment was given to them.” BDAG 567 s.v. <span class="greek">κρίμα</span> 3 says, “<i>judging, judgment,</i> the <span class="greek">κρίμα ἐδόθη αὐτοῖς</span> <i>authority to judge was given to them</i> Rv 20:4.”</p></p>
<p id="n660209"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n660209">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God, and who.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the pronoun “these” as subject.</p></p>
<p id="n6602010"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602010">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6602011"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602011">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the use of the aorist <span class="greek">ἔζησαν</span> (<span class="translit">ezēsan</span>) BDAG 425 s.v. <span class="greek">ζάω</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">β</span> says, “of dead persons who return to life <i>become alive again</i>: of humans in general (3 Km 17:23) Mt 9:18; Ac 9:41; 20:12; Rv 20:4, 5.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602012"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602012">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> This statement appears to be a parenthetical comment by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n6602013"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602013">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who has a share.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602014"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602014">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The shift from the singular pronoun (“the one”) to the plural (“them”) in the passage reflects the Greek text: The singular participle <span class="greek">ὁ ἔχων</span> (<span class="translit">ho echōn</span>) is followed by the plural pronoun <span class="greek">τούτων</span> (<span class="translit">toutōn</span>). In the interests of English style, this is obscured in most modern translations except the NASB.</p></p>
<p id="n6602015"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602015">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n6602016"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602016">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “mislead.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602017"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602017">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> The battle with <i>Gog and Magog</i> is described in the OT in Ezek 38:1-39:20.</p></p>
<p id="n6602018"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602018">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of whom the number of them [is] like the sand of the sea” (an allusion to Isa 10:22).</p></p>
<p id="n6602019"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602019">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6602020"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602020">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The shift here to past tense reflects the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n6602021"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602021">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the phrase “broad plain of the earth” BDAG 823 s.v. <span class="greek">πλάτος</span> states, “<span class="greek">τὸ πλάτος τῆς γῆς</span> Rv 20:9 comes fr. the OT (Da 12:2 LXX. Cp. Hab 1:6; Sir 1:3), but the sense is not clear: <i>breadth = the broad plain of the earth</i> is perh. meant to provide room for the countless enemies of God vs. 8, but the ‘going up’ is better suited to Satan (vs. 7) who has recently been freed, and who comes up again fr. the abyss (vs. 3).” The referent here thus appears to be a plain large enough to accommodate the numberless hoards that have drawn up for battle against the Lord Christ and his saints.</p></p>
<p id="n6602022"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602022">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “surrounded.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602023"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602023">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">παρεμβολή</span> (<span class="translit">parembolē</span>) BDAG 775 s.v. states, “Mostly used as a military t.t.…so always in our lit.…1. <i>a (fortified) camp</i>…<span class="greek">ἡ παρεμβολὴ τῶν ἁγίων</span> Rv 20:9 is also to be understood fr. the OT use of the word.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602024"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602024">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6602025"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602025">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> See L&amp;N 20.45 for the translation of <span class="greek">κατεσθίω</span> (<span class="translit">katesthiō</span>) as “to destroy utterly, to consume completely.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602026"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602026">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “misled.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602027"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602027">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “brimstone.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602028"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602028">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb in this clause is elided. In keeping with the previous past tenses some translations supply a past tense verb here (“were”), but in view of the future tense that follows (“they will be tormented”), a present tense verb was used to provide a transition from the previous past tense to the future tense that follows.</p></p>
<p id="n6602029"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602029">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6602030"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602030">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “great,” but <span class="greek">μέγας</span> (<span class="translit">megas</span>) here refers to size rather than importance.</p></p>
<p id="n6602031"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602031">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the sky.” The same Greek word means both “heaven” and “sky,” and context usually determines which is meant. In this apocalyptic scene, however, it is difficult to be sure what referent to assign the term.</p></p>
<p id="n6602032"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602032">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “vanished.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>the earth and the heaven fled from his presence</i> can be understood (1) as visual imagery representing the fear of corruptible matter in the presence of God, but (2) it can also be understood more literally as the dissolution of the universe as we know it in preparation for the appearance of the new heaven and new earth (Rev 21:1).</p></p>
<p id="n6602033"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602033">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6602034"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602034">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “another book was opened, which is of life.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602035"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602035">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the books being opened.</p></p>
<p id="n6602036"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602036">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the things written in the books according to their works.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602037"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602037">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6602038"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602038">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here <i>Death</i> is personified (cf. 1 Cor 15:55).</p></p>
<p id="n6602039"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602039">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6602040"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602040">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6602041"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602041">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “name” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n6602042"><a href="file1253.xhtml#n6602042">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the pronoun has been intensified by translating as “that person.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
