<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Colossians 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Colossians<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul,<sup><a id="n510011" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n510011">1</a></sup> an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, <span class="verse">1:2</span> to the saints, the faithful<sup><a id="n510012" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n510012">2</a></sup> brothers and sisters<sup><a id="n510013" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n510013">3</a></sup> in Christ, at Colossae. Grace and peace to you<sup><a id="n510014" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n510014">4</a></sup> from God our Father!<sup><a id="n510015" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n510015">5</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Thanksgiving and Prayer for the Church</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:3</span> We always<sup><a id="n510016" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n510016">6</a></sup> give thanks to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you, <span class="verse">1:4</span> since<sup><a id="n510017" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n510017">7</a></sup> we heard about your faith in Christ Jesus and the love that you have for all the saints. <span class="verse">1:5</span> Your faith and love have arisen<sup><a id="n510018" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n510018">8</a></sup> from the hope laid up<sup><a id="n510019" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n510019">9</a></sup> for you in heaven, which you have heard about in the message of truth, the gospel<sup><a id="n5100110" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100110">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:6</span> that has come to you. Just as in the entire world this gospel<sup><a id="n5100111" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100111">11</a></sup> is bearing fruit and growing, so it has also been bearing fruit and growing<sup><a id="n5100112" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100112">12</a></sup> among you from the first day you heard it and understood the grace of God in truth. <span class="verse">1:7</span> You learned the gospel<sup><a id="n5100113" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100113">13</a></sup> from Epaphras, our dear fellow slave<sup><a id="n5100114" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100114">14</a></sup> —a<sup><a id="n5100115" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100115">15</a></sup> faithful minister of Christ on our<sup><a id="n5100116" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100116">16</a></sup> behalf— <span class="verse">1:8</span> who also told us of your love in the Spirit. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Prayer for the Growth of the Church</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:9</span> For this reason we also, from the day we heard about you,<sup><a id="n5100117" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100117">17</a></sup> have not ceased praying for you and asking God<sup><a id="n5100118" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100118">18</a></sup> to fill<sup><a id="n5100119" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100119">19</a></sup> you with the knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding, <span class="verse">1:10</span> so that you may live<sup><a id="n5100120" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100120">20</a></sup> worthily of the Lord and please him in all respects<sup><a id="n5100121" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100121">21</a></sup> —bearing fruit in every good deed, growing in the knowledge of God, <span class="verse">1:11</span> being strengthened with all power according to his glorious might for the display of<sup><a id="n5100122" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100122">22</a></sup> all patience and steadfastness, joyfully <span class="verse">1:12</span> giving thanks to the Father who has qualified you to share<sup><a id="n5100123" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100123">23</a></sup> in the saints’<sup><a id="n5100124" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100124">24</a></sup> inheritance in the light. <span class="verse">1:13</span> He delivered us from the power of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of the Son he loves,<sup><a id="n5100125" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100125">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:14</span> in whom we have redemption,<sup><a id="n5100126" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100126">26</a></sup> the forgiveness of sins. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Supremacy of Christ </p><p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:15</span> <sup><a id="n5100127" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100127">27</a></sup> He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn<sup><a id="n5100128" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100128">28</a></sup> over all creation,<sup><a id="n5100129" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100129">29</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:16</span> for all things in heaven and on earth were created in him—all things, whether visible or invisible, whether thrones or dominions,<sup><a id="n5100130" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100130">30</a></sup> whether principalities or powers—all things were created through him and for him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:17</span> He himself is before all things and all things are held together<sup><a id="n5100131" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100131">31</a></sup> in him. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:18</span> He is the head of the body, the church, as well as the beginning, the firstborn<sup><a id="n5100132" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100132">32</a></sup> from the dead, so that he himself may become first in all things.<sup><a id="n5100133" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100133">33</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:19</span> For God<sup><a id="n5100134" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100134">34</a></sup> was pleased to have all his<sup><a id="n5100135" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100135">35</a></sup> fullness dwell<sup><a id="n5100136" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100136">36</a></sup> in the Son<sup><a id="n5100137" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100137">37</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">1:20</span> and through him to reconcile all things to himself by making peace through the blood of his cross—through him,<sup><a id="n5100138" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100138">38</a></sup> whether things on earth or things in heaven. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Goal in Ministry</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:21</span> And you were at one time strangers and enemies in your<sup><a id="n5100139" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100139">39</a></sup> minds<sup><a id="n5100140" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100140">40</a></sup> as expressed through<sup><a id="n5100141" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100141">41</a></sup> your evil deeds, <span class="verse">1:22</span> but now he has reconciled you<sup><a id="n5100142" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100142">42</a></sup> by his physical body through death to present you holy, without blemish, and blameless before him— <span class="verse">1:23</span> if indeed you remain in the faith, established and firm,<sup><a id="n5100143" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100143">43</a></sup> without shifting<sup><a id="n5100144" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100144">44</a></sup> from the hope of the gospel that you heard. This gospel has also been preached in all creation under heaven, and I, Paul, have become its servant. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:24</span> Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and I fill up in my physical body—for the sake of his body, the church—what is lacking in the sufferings of Christ. <span class="verse">1:25</span> I became a servant of the church according to the stewardship<sup><a id="n5100145" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100145">45</a></sup> from God—given to me for you—in order to complete<sup><a id="n5100146" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100146">46</a></sup> the word of God, <span class="verse">1:26</span> that is, the mystery that has been kept hidden from ages and generations, but has now been revealed to his saints. <span class="verse">1:27</span> God wanted to make known to them the glorious<sup><a id="n5100147" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100147">47</a></sup> riches of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. <span class="verse">1:28</span> We proclaim him by instructing<sup><a id="n5100148" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100148">48</a></sup> and teaching<sup><a id="n5100149" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100149">49</a></sup> all people<sup><a id="n5100150" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100150">50</a></sup> with all wisdom so that we may present every person mature<sup><a id="n5100151" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100151">51</a></sup> in Christ. <span class="verse">1:29</span> Toward this goal<sup><a id="n5100152" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100152">52</a></sup> I also labor, struggling according to his power that powerfully<sup><a id="n5100153" href="file1159_notes.xhtml#n5100153">53</a></sup> works in me. </p>

</body>
</html>