<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 25</h2>
<p id="n400251"><a href="file994.xhtml#n400251">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400252"><a href="file994.xhtml#n400252">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Five of them.”</p></p>
<p id="n400253"><a href="file994.xhtml#n400253">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For when.” Here <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400254"><a href="file994.xhtml#n400254">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “extra” is not in the Greek text but is implied. The point is that the five foolish virgins had only the oil in their lamps, but took along no extra supply from which to replenish them. This is clear from v. 8, where the lamps of the foolish virgins are going out because they are running out of oil.</p></p>
<p id="n400255"><a href="file994.xhtml#n400255">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the use of olive oil in lamps, see L&amp;N 6.202.</p></p>
<p id="n400256"><a href="file994.xhtml#n400256">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400257"><a href="file994.xhtml#n400257">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400258"><a href="file994.xhtml#n400258">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The wise answered, saying, ‘No.’”</p></p>
<p id="n400259"><a href="file994.xhtml#n400259">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4002510"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002511"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Open to us.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002512"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But answering, he said.” This is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n4002513"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002514"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002514">14</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (C<sup>3</sup> <span class="greek">Γ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 1241 1424<sup>c</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) add here “in which the Son of Man is coming” (<span class="greek">ἐν ᾗ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἔρχεται</span>, <span class="translit">en |ē ho huios tou anthrōpou erchetai</span>), reproducing almost verbatim the last line of Matt 24:44. The longer reading thus appears to be an explanatory expansion and should not be considered authentic. The earlier and better witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>35</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C* D L W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 565 892 1424* <i>al</i> lat co) lack this phrase. </p></p>
<p id="n4002515"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 8:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4002516"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002517"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002517">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>talent</i> was equal to 6000 denarii. See the note on this term in 18:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4002518"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “traded with them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002519"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002520"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002521"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> Or “Lord; or “Master” (and so throughout this paragraph).</p></p>
<p id="n4002522"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “His master said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002523"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002524"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002525"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But answering, his master said to him.” This is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4002526"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation “deposited my money with the bankers,” see L&amp;N 57.216.</p></p>
<p id="n4002527"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002527">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, “If you really feared me you should have done a minimum to get what I asked for.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002528"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ten talents.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002529"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to everyone who has, he will be given more.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The one who has will be given more</i>. Faithfulness yields great reward (see Matt 13:12; also Mark 4:25; Luke 8:18; 19:26).</p></p>
<p id="n4002530"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002530">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> The one who has nothing has even what he seems to have <i>taken from him</i>, ending up with no reward at all (see also Luke 8:18). The exact force of this is left ambiguous, but there is no comfort here for those who are pictured by the third slave as being totally unmoved by the master. Though not an outright enemy, there is no relationship to the master either.</p></p>
<p id="n4002531"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002531">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term translated “darkness” (<span class="greek">σκότος</span>) is associated with Tartarus in Aeschylus, <i>Eumenides</i> 72; other references to the darkness of death and the underworld can be found throughout the classical literature as far back as Homer. BDAG 932 s.v. <span class="greek">σκότος</span> 1 states: “Of the darkness of the place of punishment far removed fr. the heavenly kingdom (Philo, Exsecr. 152 <span class="greek">βαθὺ σκότος</span>. Cf. Wsd 17:20; PsSol 14:9.—<span class="greek">σκ. κ. βόρβορος</span> ‘gloom and muck’ await those who are untrue to the Eleusinian Mysteries, Ael. Aristid. 22, 10 K.=19 p. 421 D. Of the darkness of death and the underworld in Hom. and the Trag. As the domain of evil spirits PGM 36, 138; Theoph. Ant. 2, 7 [p. 110, 5]) <span class="greek">τὸ σκ. τὸ ἐξώτερον</span> the darkness outside Mt 8:12; 22:13; 25:30.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002532"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002533"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002534"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002534">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002535"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answer him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002536"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002536">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002537"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002538"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, the king will say to them.” This is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4002539"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002539">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002540"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002540">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited). In this context Jesus is ultimately speaking of his “followers” (whether men or women, adults or children), but the familial connotation of “brothers and sisters” is also important to retain here.</p></p>
<p id="n4002541"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002541">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002542"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002542">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then they will answer, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002543"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answer them, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002544"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002544">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002545"><a href="file994.xhtml#n4002545">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here the ultimate destination of the righteous is <i>eternal life</i>. In several places Matthew uses “life” or “eternal life” in proximity with “the kingdom of heaven” or merely “the kingdom,” suggesting a close relationship between the two concepts (compare Matt 25:34 with v. 46; Matt 19:16, 17, 29 with vv. 23, 24). Matthew consistently portrays “eternal life” as something a person enters in the world to come, whereas the Gospel of John sees “eternal life” as beginning in the present and continuing into the future (cf. John 5:24).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
