<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 27</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 27</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus Brought Before Pilate </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:1</span> When<sup><a id="n400271" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n400271">1</a></sup> it was early in the morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people plotted against Jesus to execute him. <span class="verse">27:2</span> They<sup><a id="n400272" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n400272">2</a></sup> tied him up, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate<sup><a id="n400273" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n400273">3</a></sup> the governor.<sup><a id="n400274" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n400274">4</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judas’ Suicide</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:3</span> Now when<sup><a id="n400275" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n400275">5</a></sup> Judas, who had betrayed him, saw that Jesus<sup><a id="n400276" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n400276">6</a></sup> had been condemned, he regretted what he had done and returned the thirty silver coins to the chief priests and the elders, <span class="verse">27:4</span> saying, “I have sinned by betraying innocent blood!” But they said, “What is that to us? You take care of it yourself!” <span class="verse">27:5</span> So<sup><a id="n400277" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n400277">7</a></sup> Judas threw the silver coins into the temple and left. Then he went out and hanged himself. <span class="verse">27:6</span> The<sup><a id="n400278" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n400278">8</a></sup> chief priests took the silver and said, “It is not lawful to put this into the temple treasury, since it is blood money.” <span class="verse">27:7</span> After<sup><a id="n400279" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n400279">9</a></sup> consulting together they bought the Potter’s Field with it, as a burial place for foreigners. <span class="verse">27:8</span> For this reason that field has been called the “Field of Blood” to this day. <span class="verse">27:9</span> Then what was spoken by Jeremiah<sup><a id="n4002710" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002710">10</a></sup> the prophet was fulfilled: “<i>They took the thirty silver coins, the price of the one whose price had been set by the people of Israel</i>,<sup><a id="n4002711" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002711">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:10</span> <i>and</i> <i>they gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord commanded me</i>.”<sup><a id="n4002712" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002712">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus and Pilate </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:11</span> Then<sup><a id="n4002713" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002713">13</a></sup> Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him,<sup><a id="n4002714" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002714">14</a></sup> “Are you the king<sup><a id="n4002715" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002715">15</a></sup> of the Jews?” Jesus<sup><a id="n4002716" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002716">16</a></sup> said, “You say so.”<sup><a id="n4002717" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002717">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:12</span> But when he was accused by the chief priests and the elders, he did not respond. <span class="verse">27:13</span> Then Pilate said to him, “Don’t you hear how many charges they are bringing against you?” <span class="verse">27:14</span> But he did not answer even one accusation, so that the governor was quite amazed. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:15</span> During the feast the governor was accustomed to release one prisoner to the crowd,<sup><a id="n4002718" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002718">18</a></sup> whomever they wanted. <span class="verse">27:16</span> At that time they had in custody a notorious prisoner named Jesus<sup><a id="n4002719" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002719">19</a></sup> Barabbas. <span class="verse">27:17</span> So after they had assembled, Pilate said to them, “Whom do you want me to release for you, Jesus<sup><a id="n4002720" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002720">20</a></sup> Barabbas or Jesus who is called the Christ?”<sup><a id="n4002721" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002721">21</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:18</span> (For he knew that they had handed him over because of envy.)<sup><a id="n4002722" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002722">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:19</span> As<sup><a id="n4002723" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002723">23</a></sup> he was sitting on the judgment seat,<sup><a id="n4002724" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002724">24</a></sup> his wife sent a message<sup><a id="n4002725" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002725">25</a></sup> to him:<sup><a id="n4002726" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002726">26</a></sup> “Have nothing to do with that innocent man;<sup><a id="n4002727" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002727">27</a></sup> I have suffered greatly as a result of a dream<sup><a id="n4002728" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002728">28</a></sup> about him today.” <span class="verse">27:20</span> But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas and to have Jesus killed. <span class="verse">27:21</span> The<sup><a id="n4002729" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002729">29</a></sup> governor asked them, “Which of the two do you want me to release for you?” And they said, “Barabbas!” <span class="verse">27:22</span> Pilate said to them, “Then what should I do with Jesus who is called the Christ?”<sup><a id="n4002730" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002730">30</a></sup> They all said, “Crucify him!”<sup><a id="n4002731" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002731">31</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:23</span> He asked, “Why? What wrong has he done?” But they shouted more insistently, “Crucify him!”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus is Condemned and Mocked </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:24</span> When<sup><a id="n4002732" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002732">32</a></sup> Pilate saw that he could do nothing, but that instead a riot was starting, he took some water, washed his hands before the crowd and said, “I am innocent of this man’s blood. You take care of it yourselves!”<sup><a id="n4002733" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002733">33</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:25</span> In<sup><a id="n4002734" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002734">34</a></sup> reply all the people said, “Let his blood be on us and on our children!” <span class="verse">27:26</span> Then he released Barabbas for them. But after he had Jesus flogged,<sup><a id="n4002735" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002735">35</a></sup> he handed him over<sup><a id="n4002736" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002736">36</a></sup> to be crucified.<sup><a id="n4002737" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002737">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:27</span> Then the governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the governor’s residence<sup><a id="n4002738" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002738">38</a></sup> and gathered the whole cohort<sup><a id="n4002739" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002739">39</a></sup> around him. <span class="verse">27:28</span> They<sup><a id="n4002740" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002740">40</a></sup> stripped him and put a scarlet robe<sup><a id="n4002741" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002741">41</a></sup> around him, <span class="verse">27:29</span> and after braiding<sup><a id="n4002742" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002742">42</a></sup> a crown of thorns,<sup><a id="n4002743" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002743">43</a></sup> they put it on his head. They<sup><a id="n4002744" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002744">44</a></sup> put a staff<sup><a id="n4002745" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002745">45</a></sup> in his right hand, and kneeling down before him, they mocked him:<sup><a id="n4002746" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002746">46</a></sup> “Hail, king of the Jews!”<sup><a id="n4002747" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002747">47</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:30</span> They<sup><a id="n4002748" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002748">48</a></sup> spat on him and took the staff<sup><a id="n4002749" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002749">49</a></sup> and struck him repeatedly<sup><a id="n4002750" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002750">50</a></sup> on the head. <span class="verse">27:31</span> When<sup><a id="n4002751" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002751">51</a></sup> they had mocked him, they stripped him of the robe and put his own clothes back on him. Then<sup><a id="n4002752" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002752">52</a></sup> they led him away to crucify him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Crucifixion</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:32</span> As<sup><a id="n4002753" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002753">53</a></sup> they were going out, they found a man from Cyrene named Simon, whom they forced<sup><a id="n4002754" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002754">54</a></sup> to carry his cross.<sup><a id="n4002755" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002755">55</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:33</span> They<sup><a id="n4002756" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002756">56</a></sup> came to a place called Golgotha<sup><a id="n4002757" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002757">57</a></sup> (which means “Place of the Skull”)<sup><a id="n4002758" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002758">58</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:34</span> and offered Jesus<sup><a id="n4002759" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002759">59</a></sup> wine mixed with gall to drink.<sup><a id="n4002760" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002760">60</a></sup> But after tasting it, he would not drink it. <span class="verse">27:35</span> When<sup><a id="n4002761" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002761">61</a></sup> they had crucified<sup><a id="n4002762" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002762">62</a></sup> him, <i>they divided his clothes by throwing dice</i>.<sup><a id="n4002763" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002763">63</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:36</span> Then they sat down and kept guard over him there. <span class="verse">27:37</span> Above<sup><a id="n4002764" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002764">64</a></sup> his head they put the charge against him,<sup><a id="n4002765" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002765">65</a></sup> which read:<sup><a id="n4002766" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002766">66</a></sup> “This is Jesus, the king of the Jews.” <span class="verse">27:38</span> Then two outlaws were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left. <span class="verse">27:39</span> Those<sup><a id="n4002767" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002767">67</a></sup> who passed by defamed him, shaking their heads <span class="verse">27:40</span> and saying, “You who can destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, save yourself!<sup><a id="n4002768" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002768">68</a></sup> If you are God’s Son, come down<sup><a id="n4002769" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002769">69</a></sup> from the cross!” <span class="verse">27:41</span> In<sup><a id="n4002770" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002770">70</a></sup> the same way even the chief priests—together with the experts in the law<sup><a id="n4002771" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002771">71</a></sup> and elders<sup><a id="n4002772" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002772">72</a></sup> —were mocking him:<sup><a id="n4002773" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002773">73</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:42</span> “He saved others, but he cannot save himself! He is the king of Israel! If he comes down<sup><a id="n4002774" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002774">74</a></sup> now from the cross, we will believe in him! <span class="verse">27:43</span> <i>He trusts in God—let God, if he wants to, deliver him now</i><sup><a id="n4002775" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002775">75</a></sup> because he said, ‘I am God’s Son’!” <span class="verse">27:44</span> The<sup><a id="n4002776" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002776">76</a></sup> robbers who were crucified with him also spoke abusively to him.<sup><a id="n4002777" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002777">77</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Death </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:45</span> Now from noon until three,<sup><a id="n4002778" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002778">78</a></sup> darkness came over all the land.<sup><a id="n4002779" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002779">79</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:46</span> At<sup><a id="n4002780" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002780">80</a></sup> about three o’clock Jesus shouted with a loud voice,<sup><a id="n4002781" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002781">81</a></sup> “<i>Eli</i><i>, Eli, lema sabachthani?</i>” that is, “<b><i>My God, my God, why have you forsaken me</i></b>?”<sup><a id="n4002782" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002782">82</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:47</span> When<sup><a id="n4002783" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002783">83</a></sup> some of the bystanders heard it, they said, “This man is calling for Elijah.” <span class="verse">27:48</span> Immediately<sup><a id="n4002784" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002784">84</a></sup> one of them ran and got a sponge, filled it with sour wine,<sup><a id="n4002785" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002785">85</a></sup> put it on a stick,<sup><a id="n4002786" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002786">86</a></sup> and gave it to him to drink. <span class="verse">27:49</span> But the rest said, “Leave him alone! Let’s see if Elijah will come to save him.”<sup><a id="n4002787" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002787">87</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:50</span> Then Jesus cried out again with a loud voice and gave up his spirit. <span class="verse">27:51</span> Just then<sup><a id="n4002788" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002788">88</a></sup> the temple curtain<sup><a id="n4002789" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002789">89</a></sup> was torn in two, from top to bottom. The<sup><a id="n4002790" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002790">90</a></sup> earth shook and the rocks were split apart. <span class="verse">27:52</span> And tombs were opened, and the bodies of many saints who had died<sup><a id="n4002791" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002791">91</a></sup> were raised. <span class="verse">27:53</span> (They<sup><a id="n4002792" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002792">92</a></sup> came out of the tombs after his resurrection and went into the holy city and appeared to many people.) <span class="verse">27:54</span> Now when the centurion<sup><a id="n4002793" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002793">93</a></sup> and those with him who were guarding Jesus saw the earthquake and what took place, they were extremely terrified and said, “Truly this one was God’s Son!” <span class="verse">27:55</span> Many<sup><a id="n4002794" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002794">94</a></sup> women who had followed Jesus from Galilee and given him support<sup><a id="n4002795" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002795">95</a></sup> were also there, watching from a distance. <span class="verse">27:56</span> Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Burial </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:57</span> Now when it was evening, there came a rich man from Arimathea, named Joseph, who was also a disciple of Jesus.<sup><a id="n4002796" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002796">96</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:58</span> He went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.<sup><a id="n4002797" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002797">97</a></sup> Then Pilate ordered that it be given to him. <span class="verse">27:59</span> Joseph<sup><a id="n4002798" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002798">98</a></sup> took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,<sup><a id="n4002799" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n4002799">99</a></sup> <span class="verse">27:60</span> and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut in the rock.<sup><a id="n40027100" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n40027100">100</a></sup> Then he rolled a great stone across the entrance<sup><a id="n40027101" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n40027101">101</a></sup> of the tomb and went away. <span class="verse">27:61</span> (Now Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting there, opposite the tomb.) </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Guard at the Tomb</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">27:62</span> The<sup><a id="n40027102" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n40027102">102</a></sup> next day (which is after the day of preparation) the chief priests and the Pharisees<sup><a id="n40027103" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n40027103">103</a></sup> assembled before Pilate <span class="verse">27:63</span> and said, “Sir, we remember that while that deceiver was still alive he said, ‘After three days I will rise again.’ <span class="verse">27:64</span> So give orders to secure the tomb until the third day. Otherwise his disciples may come and steal his body<sup><a id="n40027104" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n40027104">104</a></sup> and say to the people, ‘He has been raised from the dead,’ and the last deception will be worse than the first.” <span class="verse">27:65</span> Pilate said to them, “Take<sup><a id="n40027105" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n40027105">105</a></sup> a guard of soldiers. Go and make it as secure as you can.” <span class="verse">27:66</span> So<sup><a id="n40027106" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n40027106">106</a></sup> they went with the soldiers<sup><a id="n40027107" href="file996_notes.xhtml#n40027107">107</a></sup> of the guard and made the tomb secure by sealing the stone. </p>

</body>
</html>