<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Titus 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Titus<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Conduct Toward Those Outside the Church</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Remind them to be subject to rulers and<sup><a id="n560031" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n560031">1</a></sup> authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work. <span class="verse">3:2</span> They must not slander<sup><a id="n560032" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n560032">2</a></sup> anyone, but be peaceable, gentle, showing complete courtesy to all people. <span class="verse">3:3</span> For we too were once foolish, disobedient, misled, enslaved to various passions and desires, spending our lives in evil and envy, hateful and hating one another. <span class="verse">3:4</span> <sup><a id="n560033" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n560033">3</a></sup> But “when the kindness of God our Savior and his love for mankind appeared, <span class="verse">3:5</span> he saved us not by works of righteousness that we have done but on the basis of his mercy, through the washing of the new birth and the renewing of the Holy Spirit, <span class="verse">3:6</span> whom he poured out on us in full measure<sup><a id="n560034" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n560034">4</a></sup> through Jesus Christ our Savior. <span class="verse">3:7</span> And so,<sup><a id="n560035" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n560035">5</a></sup> since we have been justified by his grace, we become heirs with the confident expectation of eternal life.”<sup><a id="n560036" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n560036">6</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Summary of the Letter</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:8</span> This saying<sup><a id="n560037" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n560037">7</a></sup> is trustworthy, and I want you to insist on such truths,<sup><a id="n560038" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n560038">8</a></sup> so that those who have placed their faith in God may be intent on engaging in good works. These things are good and beneficial for all people. <span class="verse">3:9</span> But avoid foolish controversies, genealogies,<sup><a id="n560039" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n560039">9</a></sup> quarrels, and fights about the law,<sup><a id="n5600310" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600310">10</a></sup> because they are useless and empty. <span class="verse">3:10</span> Reject a divisive person after one or two warnings. <span class="verse">3:11</span> You know<sup><a id="n5600311" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600311">11</a></sup> that such a person is twisted by sin<sup><a id="n5600312" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600312">12</a></sup> and is conscious of it himself.<sup><a id="n5600313" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600313">13</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Final Instructions and Greeting</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:12</span> When I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, do your best to come to me at Nicopolis, for I have decided to spend the winter there. <span class="verse">3:13</span> Make every effort to help<sup><a id="n5600314" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600314">14</a></sup> Zenas the lawyer<sup><a id="n5600315" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600315">15</a></sup> and Apollos on their way; make sure they have what they need.<sup><a id="n5600316" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600316">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:14</span> Here is another way that our people<sup><a id="n5600317" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600317">17</a></sup> can learn<sup><a id="n5600318" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600318">18</a></sup> to engage in good works to meet pressing needs and so not be unfruitful. <span class="verse">3:15</span> Everyone with me greets you. Greet those who love us in the faith.<sup><a id="n5600319" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600319">19</a></sup> Grace be with you all.<sup><a id="n5600320" href="file1188_notes.xhtml#n5600320">20</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>