<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Mark 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Plot Against Jesus </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:1</span> Two days before the Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the chief priests and the experts in the law<sup><a id="n410141" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n410141">1</a></sup> were trying to find a way<sup><a id="n410142" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n410142">2</a></sup> to arrest Jesus<sup><a id="n410143" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n410143">3</a></sup> by stealth and kill him. <span class="verse">14:2</span> For they said, “Not during the feast, so there won’t be a riot among the people.”<sup><a id="n410144" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n410144">4</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Anointing </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:3</span> Now<sup><a id="n410145" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n410145">5</a></sup> while Jesus<sup><a id="n410146" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n410146">6</a></sup> was in Bethany at the house of Simon the leper,<sup><a id="n410147" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n410147">7</a></sup> reclining at the table,<sup><a id="n410148" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n410148">8</a></sup> a woman came with an alabaster jar<sup><a id="n410149" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n410149">9</a></sup> of costly aromatic oil<sup><a id="n4101410" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101410">10</a></sup> from pure nard. After breaking open the jar, she poured it on his head. <span class="verse">14:4</span> But some who were present indignantly said to one another, “Why this waste of expensive<sup><a id="n4101411" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101411">11</a></sup> ointment? <span class="verse">14:5</span> It<sup><a id="n4101412" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101412">12</a></sup> could have been sold for more than 300 silver coins<sup><a id="n4101413" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101413">13</a></sup> and the money<sup><a id="n4101414" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101414">14</a></sup> given to the poor!” So<sup><a id="n4101415" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101415">15</a></sup> they spoke angrily to her. <span class="verse">14:6</span> But Jesus said, “Leave her alone. Why are you bothering her? She has done a good service for me. <span class="verse">14:7</span> For you will always have the poor with you, and you can do good for them whenever you want. But you will not always have me!<sup><a id="n4101416" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101416">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:8</span> She did what she could. She anointed my body beforehand for burial. <span class="verse">14:9</span> I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4101417" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101417">17</a></sup> wherever the gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she has done will also be told in memory of her.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Plan to Betray Jesus </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:10</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101418" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101418">18</a></sup> Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief priests to betray Jesus into their hands.<sup><a id="n4101419" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101419">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:11</span> When they heard this, they were delighted<sup><a id="n4101420" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101420">20</a></sup> and promised to give him money.<sup><a id="n4101421" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101421">21</a></sup> So<sup><a id="n4101422" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101422">22</a></sup> Judas<sup><a id="n4101423" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101423">23</a></sup> began looking for an opportunity to betray him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Passover </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:12</span> Now<sup><a id="n4101424" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101424">24</a></sup> on the first day of the feast of<sup><a id="n4101425" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101425">25</a></sup> Unleavened Bread, when the Passover lamb is sacrificed,<sup><a id="n4101426" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101426">26</a></sup> Jesus’<sup><a id="n4101427" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101427">27</a></sup> disciples said to him, “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?”<sup><a id="n4101428" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101428">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:13</span> He sent two of his disciples and told them, “Go into the city, and a man carrying a jar<sup><a id="n4101429" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101429">29</a></sup> of water will meet you. Follow him. <span class="verse">14:14</span> Wherever he enters, tell the owner of the house, ‘The Teacher says, “Where is my guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’ <span class="verse">14:15</span> He will show you a large room upstairs, furnished and ready. Make preparations for us there.” <span class="verse">14:16</span> So<sup><a id="n4101430" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101430">30</a></sup> the disciples left, went<sup><a id="n4101431" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101431">31</a></sup> into the city, and found things just as he had told them,<sup><a id="n4101432" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101432">32</a></sup> and they prepared the Passover. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:17</span> Then,<sup><a id="n4101433" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101433">33</a></sup> when it was evening, he came to the house<sup><a id="n4101434" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101434">34</a></sup> with the twelve. <span class="verse">14:18</span> While they were at the table<sup><a id="n4101435" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101435">35</a></sup> eating, Jesus said, “I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4101436" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101436">36</a></sup> one of you eating with me will betray me.”<sup><a id="n4101437" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101437">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:19</span> They were distressed, and one by one said to him, “Surely not I?” <span class="verse">14:20</span> He said to them, “It is one of the twelve, one who dips his hand<sup><a id="n4101438" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101438">38</a></sup> with me into the bowl.<sup><a id="n4101439" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101439">39</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:21</span> For the Son of Man will go as it is written about him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for him if he had never been born.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Supper </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:22</span> While they were eating, he took bread, and after giving thanks he broke it, gave it to them, and said, “Take it. This is my body.” <span class="verse">14:23</span> And after taking the cup and giving thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank from it. <span class="verse">14:24</span> He said to them, “This is my blood, the blood<sup><a id="n4101440" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101440">40</a></sup> of the covenant,<sup><a id="n4101441" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101441">41</a></sup> that is poured out for many. <span class="verse">14:25</span> I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4101442" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101442">42</a></sup> I will no longer drink of the fruit<sup><a id="n4101443" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101443">43</a></sup> of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.”<sup><a id="n4101444" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101444">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:26</span> After singing a hymn,<sup><a id="n4101445" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101445">45</a></sup> they went out to the Mount of Olives. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Prediction of Peter’s Denial </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:27</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101446" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101446">46</a></sup> Jesus said to them, “You will all fall away, for it is written,</p>
<p class="otpoetry">‘<b><i>I will strike the shepherd,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>and the sheep will be scattered</b></i>.’<sup><a id="n4101447" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101447">47</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodyblock"><span class="verse">14:28</span> But after I am raised, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.” <span class="verse">14:29</span> Peter said to him, “Even if they all fall away, I will not!” <span class="verse">14:30</span> Jesus said to him, “I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4101448" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101448">48</a></sup> today—this very night—before a rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.” <span class="verse">14:31</span> But Peter<sup><a id="n4101449" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101449">49</a></sup> insisted emphatically,<sup><a id="n4101450" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101450">50</a></sup> “Even if I must die with you, I will never deny you.” And all of them said the same thing. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Gethsemane </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:32</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101451" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101451">51</a></sup> they went to a place called Gethsemane, and Jesus<sup><a id="n4101452" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101452">52</a></sup> said to his disciples, “Sit here while I pray.” <span class="verse">14:33</span> He took Peter, James,<sup><a id="n4101453" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101453">53</a></sup> and John with him, and became very troubled and distressed. <span class="verse">14:34</span> He said to them, “My soul is deeply grieved, even to the point of death. Remain here and stay alert.” <span class="verse">14:35</span> Going a little farther, he threw himself to the ground and prayed that if it were possible the hour would pass from him. <span class="verse">14:36</span> He said, “<i>Abba</i>,<sup><a id="n4101454" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101454">54</a></sup> Father, all things are possible for you. Take this cup<sup><a id="n4101455" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101455">55</a></sup> away from me. Yet not what I will, but what you will.” <span class="verse">14:37</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101456" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101456">56</a></sup> he came and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, “Simon, are you sleeping? Couldn’t you stay awake for one hour? <span class="verse">14:38</span> Stay awake and pray that you will not fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.” <span class="verse">14:39</span> He went away again and prayed the same thing. <span class="verse">14:40</span> When he came again he found them sleeping; they could not keep their eyes open.<sup><a id="n4101457" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101457">57</a></sup> And they did not know what to tell him. <span class="verse">14:41</span> He came a third time and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting?<sup><a id="n4101458" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101458">58</a></sup> Enough of that!<sup><a id="n4101459" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101459">59</a></sup> The hour has come. Look, the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. <span class="verse">14:42</span> Get up, let us go. Look! My betrayer<sup><a id="n4101460" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101460">60</a></sup> is approaching!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Betrayal and Arrest </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:43</span> Right away, while Jesus<sup><a id="n4101461" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101461">61</a></sup> was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, arrived.<sup><a id="n4101462" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101462">62</a></sup> With him came a crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent by the chief priests and experts in the law<sup><a id="n4101463" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101463">63</a></sup> and elders. <span class="verse">14:44</span> (Now the betrayer<sup><a id="n4101464" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101464">64</a></sup> had given them a sign, saying, “The one I kiss is the man. Arrest him and lead him away under guard.”)<sup><a id="n4101465" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101465">65</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:45</span> When Judas<sup><a id="n4101466" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101466">66</a></sup> arrived, he went up to Jesus<sup><a id="n4101467" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101467">67</a></sup> immediately and said, “Rabbi!” and kissed<sup><a id="n4101468" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101468">68</a></sup> him. <span class="verse">14:46</span> Then they took hold of him<sup><a id="n4101469" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101469">69</a></sup> and arrested him. <span class="verse">14:47</span> One of the bystanders drew his sword and struck the high priest’s slave,<sup><a id="n4101470" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101470">70</a></sup> cutting off his ear. <span class="verse">14:48</span> Jesus said to them, “Have you come with swords and clubs to arrest me like you would an outlaw?<sup><a id="n4101471" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101471">71</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:49</span> Day after day I was with you, teaching in the temple courts, yet<sup><a id="n4101472" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101472">72</a></sup> you did not arrest me. But this has happened so that<sup><a id="n4101473" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101473">73</a></sup> the scriptures would be fulfilled.” <span class="verse">14:50</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101474" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101474">74</a></sup> all the disciples<sup><a id="n4101475" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101475">75</a></sup> left him and fled. <span class="verse">14:51</span> A young man was following him, wearing only a linen cloth. They tried to arrest him, <span class="verse">14:52</span> but he ran off naked,<sup><a id="n4101476" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101476">76</a></sup> leaving his linen cloth behind.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Condemned by the Sanhedrin </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:53</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101477" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101477">77</a></sup> they led Jesus to the high priest, and all the chief priests and elders and experts in the law<sup><a id="n4101478" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101478">78</a></sup> came together. <span class="verse">14:54</span> And Peter had followed him from a distance, up to the high priest’s courtyard. He<sup><a id="n4101479" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101479">79</a></sup> was sitting with the guards<sup><a id="n4101480" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101480">80</a></sup> and warming himself by the fire. <span class="verse">14:55</span> The chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for evidence against Jesus so that they could put him to death, but they did not find anything. <span class="verse">14:56</span> Many gave false testimony against him, but their testimony did not agree. <span class="verse">14:57</span> Some stood up and gave this false testimony against him:<sup><a id="n4101481" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101481">81</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:58</span> “We heard him say, ‘I will destroy this temple made with hands and in three days build another not made with hands.’” <span class="verse">14:59</span> Yet even on this point their testimony did not agree. <span class="verse">14:60</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101482" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101482">82</a></sup> the high priest stood up before them<sup><a id="n4101483" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101483">83</a></sup> and asked Jesus, “Have you no answer? What is this that they are testifying against you?” <span class="verse">14:61</span> But he was silent and did not answer. Again the high priest questioned him,<sup><a id="n4101484" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101484">84</a></sup> “Are you the Christ,<sup><a id="n4101485" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101485">85</a></sup> the Son of the Blessed One?” <span class="verse">14:62</span> “I am,” said Jesus, “and you will see <i>the Son of Man sitting at the right hand</i><sup><a id="n4101486" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101486">86</a></sup> of the Power<sup><a id="n4101487" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101487">87</a></sup> and <i>coming</i> <i>with the clouds of heaven</i>.”<sup><a id="n4101488" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101488">88</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:63</span> Then the high priest tore his clothes and said, “Why do we still need witnesses? <span class="verse">14:64</span> You have heard the blasphemy! What is your verdict?”<sup><a id="n4101489" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101489">89</a></sup> They all condemned him as deserving death. <span class="verse">14:65</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101490" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101490">90</a></sup> some began to spit on him, and to blindfold him, and to strike him with their fists, saying, “Prophesy!” The guards also took him and beat<sup><a id="n4101491" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101491">91</a></sup> him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Peter’s Denials </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:66</span> Now<sup><a id="n4101492" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101492">92</a></sup> while Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the high priest’s slave girls<sup><a id="n4101493" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101493">93</a></sup> came by. <span class="verse">14:67</span> When she saw Peter warming himself, she looked directly at him and said, “You also were with that Nazarene, Jesus.” <span class="verse">14:68</span> But he denied it:<sup><a id="n4101494" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101494">94</a></sup> “I don’t even understand what you’re talking about!”<sup><a id="n4101495" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101495">95</a></sup> Then<sup><a id="n4101496" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101496">96</a></sup> he went out to the gateway, and a rooster crowed.<sup><a id="n4101497" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101497">97</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:69</span> When the slave girl saw him, she began again to say to the bystanders, “This man is one of them.” <span class="verse">14:70</span> But he denied it again. A short time later the bystanders again said to Peter, “You must be<sup><a id="n4101498" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101498">98</a></sup> one of them, because you are also a Galilean.” <span class="verse">14:71</span> Then he began to curse, and he swore with an oath, “I do not know this man you are talking about!” <span class="verse">14:72</span> Immediately a rooster<sup><a id="n4101499" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n4101499">99</a></sup> crowed a second time. Then<sup><a id="n41014100" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n41014100">100</a></sup> Peter remembered what Jesus had said to him: “Before a rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.” And he broke down and wept.<sup><a id="n41014101" href="file1012_notes.xhtml#n41014101">101</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>