<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Mark 1</h2>
<p id="n410011"><a href="file999.xhtml#n410011">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> By the time Mark wrote, the word <i>gospel</i> had become a technical term referring to the preaching about Jesus Christ and God’s saving power accomplished through him for all who believe (cf. Rom 1:16). </p></p>
<p id="n410012"><a href="file999.xhtml#n410012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive in the phrase <span class="greek">τοῦ εὐαγγελίου ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou euangeliou Iēsou Christou</span>, “the gospel of Jesus Christ”) could be translated as either a subjective genitive (“the gospel which Jesus brings [or proclaims]”) or an objective genitive (“the gospel about Jesus Christ”). Either is grammatically possible. This is possibly an instance of a plenary genitive (see <i>ExSyn</i> 119-21; M. Zerwick, <i>Biblical Greek</i>, §§36-39). If so, an interplay between the two concepts is intended: The gospel which Jesus proclaims is in fact the gospel about himself.</p></p>
<p id="n410013"><a href="file999.xhtml#n410013">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* <span class="greek">Θ</span> 28 <i>l</i>2211 sa<sup>ms</sup> Or lack <span class="greek">υἱοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">huiou theou</span>, “Son of God”), and both Irenaeus and Epiphanius additionally lack <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστου</span> while virtually all the rest of the witnesses have the words (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D L W <span class="greek">Γ</span> latt sy co Ir<sup>lat</sup>; A <span class="greek">Δ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> also have <span class="greek">τοῦ</span> [<span class="translit">tou</span>] before <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span>), so the evidence seems to argue for the authenticity of “Son of God.” Most likely, the words were omitted by accident in some witnesses, since the last four words of v. 1, in majuscule script, would have looked like this: <span class="uncial">iu_c_r_u_u_u_q_u_</span>. With all the successive <i>upsilons</i> an accidental deletion is likely. Further, the inclusion of <span class="greek">υἱοῦ θεοῦ</span> here finds its complement in 15:39, where the centurion claims that Jesus was <span class="greek">υἱὸς θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">huios theou</span>, “son of God”). Even though <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> is in general one of the best NT <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, the scribes of this codex were often quite sloppy. When an accidental omission is possible, its voice is significantly diminished. <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>’s testimony thus is not quite as preeminent in this situation. There are several other instances in which it breaks up chains of genitives ending in <span class="greek">ου</span> (cf., e.g., Acts 28:31; Col 2:2; Heb 12:2; Rev 12:14; 15:7; 22:1), showing that there is a significantly higher possibility of accidental scribal omission in a case like this. This christological <i>inclusio</i> parallels both Matthew (“Immanuel…God with us” in 1:23/“I am with you” in 28:20) and John (“the Word was God” in 1:1/“My Lord and my God” in 20:28), probably reflecting nascent christological development and articulation.</p><p><b>sn</b> The first verse of Mark’s Gospel appears to function as a title: <i>The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God</i>. It is not certain, however, whether Mark intended it to refer to the entire Gospel, to the ministry of John the Baptist, or through the use of the term <i>beginning</i> (<span class="greek">ἀρχή</span>, <span class="translit">archē</span>) to allude to Genesis 1:1 (in the Greek Bible, LXX). If the statement as a whole is an allusion to Genesis 1:1, then Mark is saying that with the “good news” of the coming of Christ, God is commencing a “new beginning.” But an intriguing possibility is that Mark is signaling that the whole treatise is <i>just the beginning</i> of the good news about Jesus Christ. This would fit well with an intentional open-ended conclusion at 16:8 in which the author leaves the readers to continue the story of the evangel in their own lives. See <b>tc</b> note at 16:8.</p></p>
<p id="n410014"><a href="file999.xhtml#n410014">4</a> <p><b>tc</b> <i>Grk</i> “in Isaiah the prophet.” Instead of “in Isaiah the prophet” the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> read “in the prophets” (A W <span class="greek">Γ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 28 579 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> Ir<sup>lat</sup>). Except for Irenaeus (2nd century), the earliest evidence for this is from the 5th (or possibly late 4th) century (Washingtonianus and Alexandrinus). The difficulty of Irenaeus is that he wrote in Greek but has been preserved largely in Latin. His Greek remains have “in Isaiah the prophet.” Only the later Latin translation has “in the prophets” (yet in one of the three citations of Mark 1:2 Irenaeus’s Latin has “in Isaiah the prophet”). The KJV reading is thus in harmony with the majority of <i>late</i> <span class="smcaps">mss</span>. On the other hand, the witnesses for “in Isaiah the prophet” (either with the article before Isaiah or not) are early and geographically widespread: <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D L <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 565 700 892 1241 <i>al</i> sy<sup>p</sup> co Ir Or Epiph. This evidence runs deep into the 2nd century, is widespread, and is found in the most significant Alexandrian, Western, and so-called Caesarean witnesses. The “Isaiah” reading has a better external pedigree in almost every way. It has the support of the earliest and best witnesses from most of the text-forms. Moreover it is most likely the harder reading, since the quotation in the first part of the verse appears to be from Exod 23:20 and Mal 3:1, with the quotation from Isa 40:3 coming in the next verse. Although the reading of the later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> seems motivated by a desire to resolve this difficulty, Robinson has made a good case for “in the prophets” as the original wording (Maurice Robinson, “Two Passages in Mark: A Critical Test for the Byzantine-Priority Hypothesis,” <i>Faith &amp; Mission</i> 13.2 [1996]: 68-80). <i>Part</i> of his argument is that <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 erroneously have “Isaiah” in Matt 13:35, and these same <span class="smcaps">mss</span> read “Isaiah the prophet” in Mark 1:2. Consequently, he suggests that their testimony in the Marcan text should be discounted. This may be true but it ignores the rest of the witnesses for the “Isaiah” reading here. All things considered, “Isaiah the prophet” has better credentials for authenticity in Mark 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n410015"><a href="file999.xhtml#n410015">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The opening lines of the quotation are from Exod 23:20; Mal 3:1. Here is the forerunner who points the way to the arrival of God’s salvation. His job is to prepare and guide the people, as the cloud did for Israel in the desert.</p></p>
<p id="n410016"><a href="file999.xhtml#n410016">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> This call to “make his paths straight” in this context is probably an allusion to preparation through repentance.</p></p>
<p id="n410017"><a href="file999.xhtml#n410017">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 40:3.</p></p>
<p id="n410018"><a href="file999.xhtml#n410018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert.”</p></p>
<p id="n410019"><a href="file999.xhtml#n410019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> While Matthew and Luke consistently use the noun <span class="greek">βαπτίστης</span> (<span class="translit">baptistēs</span>, “[the] Baptist”) to refer to John, as a kind of a title, Mark prefers the substantival participle <span class="greek">ὁ βαπτίζων</span> (<span class="translit">ho baptizōn</span>, “the one who baptizes, the baptizer”) to describe him (only twice does he use the noun [Mark 6:25; 8:28]).</p></p>
<p id="n4100110"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100110">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>A baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins</i> was a call for preparation for the arrival of the Lord’s salvation. To participate in this baptism was a recognition of the need for God’s forgiveness with a sense that one needed to live differently as a response to it.</p></p>
<p id="n4100111"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the whole Judean countryside.” Mark uses the Greek conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) at numerous places in his Gospel to begin sentences and paragraphs. This practice is due to Semitic influence and reflects in many cases the use of the Hebrew <span class="hebrew">&#8207;ו&#8206;</span> (<i>vav</i>) which is used in OT narrative, much as it is here, to carry the narrative along. Because in contemporary English style it is not acceptable to begin every sentence with “and,” <span class="greek">καί</span> was often left untranslated or rendered as “now,” “so,” “then,” or “but” depending on the context. When left untranslated it has not been noted. When given an alternative translation, this is usually indicated by a note. </p></p>
<p id="n4100113"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they were being baptized by him.” The passive construction has been rendered as active in the translation for the sake of English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4100114"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100114">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> John’s lifestyle was in stark contrast to many of the religious leaders of Jerusalem who lived in relative ease and luxury. While his clothing and diet were indicative of someone who lived in the desert, they also depicted him in his role as God’s prophet (cf. Zech 13:4); his appearance is similar to the Prophet Elijah (2 Kgs 1:8). <i>Locusts and wild honey</i> were a common diet in desert regions and locusts (dried insects) are listed in Lev 11:22 among the “clean” foods. </p></p>
<p id="n4100115"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “proclaimed, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4100116"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of whom I am not worthy.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The humility of John is evident in the statement <i>I am not worthy</i>. This was considered one of the least worthy tasks of a slave, and John did not consider himself worthy to do even that for the one to come, despite the fact he himself was a prophet.</p></p>
<p id="n4100117"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term refers to the leather strap or thong used to bind a sandal. This is often viewed as a collective singular and translated as a plural, “the straps of his sandals,” but it may be more emphatic to retain the singular here.</p></p>
<p id="n4100118"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4100120"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> “River” is not in the Greek text but is supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100121"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and immediately coming up out of the water, he saw.” The present participle has been translated temporally, with the subject (Jesus) specified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100122"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sky.” The Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) may be translated “sky” or “heaven,” depending on the context. The same word is used in v. 11.</p></p>
<p id="n4100123"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100123">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>like a dove</i> is a descriptive comparison. The Spirit is not a dove, but descended like one in some sort of bodily representation.</p></p>
<p id="n4100124"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my beloved Son,” or “my Son, the beloved [one].” The force of <span class="greek">ἀγαπητός</span> (<span class="translit">agapētos</span>) is often “pertaining to one who is the only one of his or her class, but at the same time is particularly loved and cherished” (L&amp;N 58.53; cf. also BDAG 7 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4100125"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with you I am well pleased.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The allusions in the remarks of the text recall Ps 2:7a; Isa 42:1 and either Isa 41:8 or, less likely, Gen 22:12, 16. God is marking out Jesus as his chosen one (the meaning of “[in you I take] great delight”), but it may well be that this was a private experience that only Jesus and John saw and heard (cf. John 1:32-33).</p></p>
<p id="n4100126"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100126">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Judean Wilderness (or Judean Desert) is a geographical feature extending from the mountains of Judea in the west to the Dead Sea in the east. It is a relatively small desert, covering only about 600 square miles (roughly 1,500 square km). The Judean Wilderness is characterized by breathtaking panoramas: mountains, cliffs, chalk hills, and plateaus are interrupted by riverbeds and canyons, some of which are up to 1,500 feet (500 m) deep. Some of the rivers are seasonal streams and some have water all year round. The tall cliffs on the eastern edge of the desert reach a height of 1,000 feet (300 m) above the shore of the Dead Sea. The Judean Wilderness is close to Jerusalem and sparsely populated with few settlements around its edges. It is known for its rugged and desolate landscape, which has provided a refuge and hiding place for rebels and zealots throughout history, as well as solitude for monks and hermits.</p></p>
<p id="n4100127"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100127">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>forty days</i> may allude to the experience of Moses (Exod 34:28), Elijah (1 Kgs 19:8, 15), or David and Goliath (1 Sam 17:16).</p></p>
<p id="n4100128"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100129"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “were serving him,” “were ministering to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100130"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “arrested,” “taken into custody” (see L&amp;N 37.12).</p></p>
<p id="n4100131"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100131">31</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including some significant ones (A D W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 28<sup>c</sup> 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy), have <span class="greek">τῆς βασιλείας</span> (<span class="translit">tēs basileias</span>) between <span class="greek">τὸ εὐαγγέλιον</span> (<span class="translit">to euangelion</span>) and <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou theou</span>): “the gospel of the kingdom of God.” On the one hand, it is perhaps possible that <span class="greek">τῆς βασιλείας</span> was omitted to conform the expression to that which is found in the epistles (cf. Rom 1:1; 15:16; 2 Cor 11:7; 1 Thess 2:2, 8, 9; 1 Pet 4:17). On the other hand, this expression, “the gospel of God,” occurs nowhere else in the Gospels, while “the gospel of the kingdom” is a Matthean expression (Matt 4:23; 9:35; 24:14), and “kingdom of God” is pervasive in the synoptic Gospels (occurring over 50 times). Scribes would thus be more prone to add <span class="greek">τῆς βασιλείας</span> than to omit it. Further, the external support for the shorter reading (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 28* 33 565 579 892 sa Or) is significantly stronger than that for the longer reading. There is little doubt, therefore, that the shorter reading is authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n4100132"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive in the phrase <span class="greek">τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">to euangelion tou theou</span>, “the gospel of God”) could be translated as either a subjective genitive (“the gospel which God brings”) or an objective genitive (“the gospel about God”). Either is grammatically possible. This is possibly an instance of a plenary genitive (see <i>ExSyn</i> 119-21; M. Zerwick, <i>Biblical Greek</i>, §§36-39). If so, an interplay between the two concepts is intended: The gospel which God brings is in fact the gospel about himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4100133"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4100134"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100134">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4100135"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100135">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical comment by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4100136"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women, thus “people.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The kind of fishing envisioned was net—not line—fishing (cf. v. 16; cf. also BDAG 55 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀμφιβάλλω</span>, <span class="greek">ἀμφίβληστρον</span>) which involved a circular net that had heavy weights around its perimeter. The occupation of fisherman was labor-intensive. The imagery of using a lure and a line (and waiting for the fish to strike) is thus foreign to this text. Rather, the imagery of a fisherman involved much strain, long hours, and often little results. Jesus’ point may have been one or more of the following: the strenuousness of evangelism, the work ethic that it required, persistence and dedication to the task (often in spite of minimal results), the infinite value of the new “catch” (viz., people), and perhaps an eschatological theme of snatching people from judgment (cf. W. L. Lane, <i>Mark</i> [NICNT], 67). If this last motif is in view, then catching people is the opposite of catching fish: The fish would be caught, killed, cooked, and eaten; people would be caught so as to remove them from eternal destruction and to give them new life.</p></p>
<p id="n4100137"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100137">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>followed him</i> pictures discipleship, which means that to learn from Jesus is to follow him as the guiding priority of one’s life.</p></p>
<p id="n4100138"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a boat.” The phrase <span class="greek">ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ</span> (<span class="translit">en tō ploiō</span>) can either refer to a generic boat, some boat (as it seems to do in Matt 4:21); or it can refer to “their” boat, implying possession. Mark assumes a certain preunderstanding on the part of his readers about the first four disciples and hence the translation “their boat” is justified (cf. also v. 20 in which the “hired men” indicates that Zebedee’s family owned the boats). </p></p>
<p id="n4100139"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100139">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> In 1986 following a period of drought and low lake levels, a fishing boat from the first century was discovered on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee. It was excavated and preserved and can now be seen in the Yigal Allon Museum in Kibbutz Ginosar north of Tiberias. The remains of the boat are 27 ft (8.27 m) long and 7.5 ft (2.3 m) wide; it could be rowed by four rowers and had a mast for a sail. The boat is now known as the “Jesus boat” or the “Sea of Galilee boat” although there is no known historical connection of any kind with Jesus or his disciples. However, the boat is typical for the period and has provided archaeologists with much information about design and construction of boats on the Sea of Galilee in the first century.</p></p>
<p id="n4100140"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100141"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100141">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Capernaum</i> was a town located on the northwest shore of the Sea of Galilee, 680 ft (204 m) below sea level. It existed since Hasmonean times and was a major trade and economic center in the North Galilean region. The population in the first century is estimated to be around 1,500. Capernaum became the hub of operations for Jesus’ Galilean ministry (Matt 4:13; Mark 2:1). In modern times the site was discovered in 1838 by the American explorer E. Robinson, and major excavations began in 1905 by German archaeologists H. Kohl and C. Watzinger. Not until 1968, however, were remains from the time of Jesus visible; in that year V. Corbo and S. Loffreda began a series of annual archaeological campaigns that lasted until 1985. This work uncovered what is thought to be the house of Simon Peter as well as ruins of the first century synagogue beneath the later synagogue from the fourth or fifth century A.D. Today gently rolling hills and date palms frame the first century site, a favorite tourist destination of visitors to the Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n4100142"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">εὐθύς</span> (<span class="translit">euthus</span>, often translated “immediately” or “right away”) has not been translated here. It sometimes occurs with a weakened, inferential use (BDAG 406 s.v. 2), not contributing significantly to the flow of the narrative. For further discussion, see R. J. Decker, <i>Temporal Deixis of the Greek Verb in the Gospel of Mark with Reference to Verbal Aspect</i> (SBG 10), 73-77.</p></p>
<p id="n4100143"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100144"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100144">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>synagogue</i> was a place for Jewish prayer and worship, with recognized leadership (cf. Luke 8:41). Though its origin is not entirely clear, it seems to have arisen in the postexilic community during the intertestamental period. A town could establish a synagogue if there were at least ten men. In normative Judaism of the NT period, the OT scripture was read and discussed in the synagogue by the men who were present. (See the Mishnah, <i>m. Megillah</i> 3-4; <i>m. Berakhot</i> 2.) First came the law, then the prophets, then someone was asked to speak on the texts. Jesus undoubtedly took the opportunity on this occasion to speak about his person and mission, and its relationship to Old Testament fulfillment. </p></p>
<p id="n4100145"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100146"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100146">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ teaching impressed the hearers with the directness of its claim; he taught with <i>authority</i>. A study of Jewish rabbinic interpretation shows that it was typical to cite a list of authorities to make one’s point. Apparently Jesus addressed the issues in terms of his own understanding.</p></p>
<p id="n4100147"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the scribes.” The traditional rendering of <span class="greek">γραμματεύς</span> (<span class="translit">grammateus</span>) as “scribe” does not communicate much to the modern English reader, for whom the term might mean “professional copyist,” if it means anything at all. The people referred to here were recognized experts in the law of Moses and in traditional laws and regulations. Thus “expert in the law” comes closer to the meaning for the modern reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4100148"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100148">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Unclean spirit</i> refers to an evil spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n4100149"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he cried out, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4100150"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> <b>“</b>What to us and to you?” This is an idiom meaning, “We have nothing to do with one another,” or “Why bother us!” The phrase <span class="greek">τί ἡμῖν καὶ σοί</span> (<span class="translit">ti hēmin kai soi</span>) is Semitic in origin, though it made its way into colloquial Greek (BDAG 275 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐγώ</span>). The equivalent Hebrew expression in the OT had two basic meanings: (1) When one person was unjustly bothering another, the injured party could say “What to me and to you?” meaning, “What have I done to you that you should do this to me?” (Judg 11:12, 2 Chr 35:21, 1 Kgs 17:18). (2) When someone was asked to get involved in a matter he felt was no business of his own, he could say to the one asking him, “What to me and to you?” meaning, “That is your business, how am I involved?” (2 Kgs 3:13, Hos 14:8). Option (1) implies hostility, while option (2) merely implies disengagement. BDAG suggests the following as glosses for this expression: <i>What have I to do with you? What have we in common? Leave me alone! Never mind!</i> Hostility between Jesus and the demons is certainly to be understood in this context, hence the translation: “Leave me alone….” For a very similar expression see Lk 8:28 and (in a different context) John 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4100151"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100151">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> The confession of Jesus as <i>the Holy One</i> here is significant, coming from an unclean spirit. Jesus, as the Holy One of God, who bears God’s Spirit and is the expression of holiness, comes to deal with uncleanness and unholiness.</p></p>
<p id="n4100152"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100152">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4100153"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100153">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “rebuked him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4100154"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100154">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> The command <i>Come out of him!</i> is an example of Jesus’ authority (see v. 22). Unlike other exorcists, Jesus did not use magical incantations nor did he invoke anyone else’s name.</p></p>
<p id="n4100155"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100155">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100156"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100156">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4100157"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100157">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 1:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4100158"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100158">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is now significant agreement among scholars that the house of Simon Peter in Capernaum has been found beneath the ruins of a fifth-century Byzantine church some 84 ft south of the synagogue. At the bottom of several layers of archaeological remains is a first-century house that apparently was designated for public viewing sometime in the mid-first century, and continued to be so in subsequent centuries. For details see S. Loffreda, “Capernaum — Jesus’ Own City,” <i>Bible and Spade</i> 10.1 (1981): 1-17.</p></p>
<p id="n4100159"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100159">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100160"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100160">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100161"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100161">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb is taken ingressively here.</p></p>
<p id="n4100162"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100162">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100163"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100163">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note how the author distinguishes healing from exorcism here, implying that the two are not identical.</p></p>
<p id="n4100164"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100164">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4100165"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100165">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> Why Jesus <i>would not permit the demons to speak</i> is much discussed. Two possibilities are (1) the mere source of the testimony (demonic) and (2) that the title, with its political implications, may have had elements that Jesus wished to avoid until the full nature of his mission was clarified.</p></p>
<p id="n4100166"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100166">66</a> <p><b>tc</b> The <span class="smcaps">mss</span> vary on what is read at the end of v. 34. Some have “they knew him to be the Christ,” with various Greek constructions (<span class="greek">ᾔδεισαν αὐτὸν Χριστὸν εἶναι</span> [<span class="translit">ēdeisan auton Christon einai</span>] in B L W <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 28 33<sup>vid</sup> 565 <i>al</i> bo; <span class="greek">ᾔδεισαν τὸν Χριστὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι</span> [<span class="translit">ēdeisan ton Christon auton einai</span>] in [<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup>] C [ƒ<sup>13</sup> 700] 892 1241 [1424]); codex D has “they knew him and he healed many who were sick with various diseases and drove out many demons,” reproducing exactly the first half of the verse. These first two longer readings are predictable expansions to an enticingly brief statement; the fact that there are significant variations on the word order and presence or absence of <span class="greek">τόν</span> argues against their authenticity as well. D’s reading is a palpable error of sight. The reading adopted in the translation is supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A 0130 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat. This support, though hardly overwhelming in itself, in combination with strong internal evidence, renders the shorter reading fairly certain.</p></p>
<p id="n4100167"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100167">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100168"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100168">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100169"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100169">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect <span class="greek">προσηύχετο</span> (<span class="translit">prosēucheto</span>) implies some duration to the prayer.</p></p>
<p id="n4100170"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100170">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100171"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100171">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Because for this purpose I have come forth.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100172"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100172">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100173"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100173">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 1:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4100174"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100174">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4100175"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100175">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> The ancient term for leprosy covers a wider array of conditions than what is called leprosy today (Hansen’s disease). In the OT the Hebrew term generally referred to a number of exfoliative (scaly) skin diseases (when applied to humans). A person with one of these diseases was totally ostracized from society until he was declared cured (Lev 13:45-46). In the NT the Greek term also refers to a number of skin diseases, but there is some evidence that true leprosy (Hansen’s disease) could be referred to, since that disease began to be described by Greek physicians in Alexandria, Egypt around 300 B.C. and thus might have been present in Judea and Galilee just before the time of Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4100176"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100176">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a third class condition. The report portrays the leper making no presumptions about whether Jesus will heal him or not.</p></p>
<p id="n4100177"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100177">77</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading found in almost the entire NT <span class="smcaps">ms</span> tradition is <span class="greek">σπλαγχνισθείς</span> (<span class="translit">splanchnistheis</span>, “moved with compassion”). Codex Bezae (D) and a few Latin <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (a d ff<sup>2</sup> r<sup>1</sup>*) here read <span class="greek">ὀργισθείς</span> (<span class="translit">orgistheis</span>, “moved with anger”). Just as important, the second-century Diatessaron by Tatian almost surely spoke of Jesus’ anger here. On the one hand, the external evidence is so overwhelming for <span class="greek">σπλαγχνισθείς</span> that only solid internal reasoning could overturn it. On the other hand, various creative arguments that have been offered for accidental changes in the early transmission of the text from <span class="greek">σπλαγχνισθείς</span> to <span class="greek">ὀργισθείς</span> generally reveal more about the ingenuity of the scholar than the authenticity of the text. Inner-Greek, inner-Latin, and inner-Syriac accidental changes have all been suggested, but they lack conviction. (See, e.g., Peter J. Williams, “An examination of Ehrman’s case for <span class="greek">ὀργισθείς</span> in Mark 1:41, ” <i>NovT</i> 53 [2011]: 1–12, who argues for an inner-Greek corruption; Metzger, <i>TCGNT</i> 65, suggests “It is possible that the reading <span class="greek">ὀργισθείς</span> either (a) was suggested by <span class="greek">ἐμβριμησάμενος</span> of ver. 43, or (b) arose from confusion between similar words in Aramaic (compare Syriac <span class="translit">ethraḥm</span>, “he had pity,” with <span class="translit">ethra‘em</span>, “he was enraged”).” It remains far more difficult to account for a change from “moved with compassion” to “moved with anger” than it is to envision a copyist softening “moved with anger” to “moved with compassion.” Against this, it has been asserted that it is difficult to explain why scribes would be prone to soften the text here but not in Mark 3:5 or 10:14 (where Jesus is also said to be angry or indignant). However, at France notes, this view “ignores the fact that in those passages, unlike here, there was obvious cause for anger” (R. T. France, <i>The Gospel of Mark</i>, NIGTC [Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2002], 115). In the parallels both Matthew and Luke have neither <span class="greek">ὀργισθείς</span> nor <span class="greek">σπλαγχνισθείς</span> here. The simplest explanation for this omission is that their copies of Mark read <span class="greek">ὀργισθείς</span> and the other evangelists simply deleted it. Nevertheless, a decision in this case is not easy. Perhaps the best defense of the “angry” reading is Bart D. Ehrman’s “A Leper in the Hands of an Angry Jesus,” in <i>New Testament Greek and Exegesis: Essays in Honor of Gerald F. Hawthorne</i>, ed. Amy M. Donaldson and Timothy B. Sailors (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2003), 77–98. For discussion of the evidence and bibliography, see D. B. Wallace, “Textual Criticism and the Criterion of Embarrassment,” <i>Jesus, Skepticism, and the Problem of History: Criteria and Context in the Study of Christian Origins</i>, ed. Darrell L. Bock and J. Ed. Komoszewski (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, forthcoming), discussion on Mark 1:41.</p></p>
<p id="n4100178"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100178">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100179"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100179">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Touched</i>. This touch would have rendered Jesus ceremonially unclean (Lev 5:3; see also <i>m. Nega’im</i> 3.1; 11.1; 12.1; 13.6-12).</p></p>
<p id="n4100180"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100180">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100181"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100181">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (the man who was healed) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100182"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100182">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after warning him, he immediately sent him away and told him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100183"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100183">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> The silence ordered by Jesus was probably meant to last only until the cleansing took place with the priests and sought to prevent Jesus’ healings from becoming the central focus of the people’s reaction to him. See also 1:34; 3:12; 5:43; 7:36; 8:26, 30; 9:9 for other cases where Jesus asks for silence concerning him and his ministry.</p></p>
<p id="n4100184"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100184">84</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the phrase <i>bring the offering that Moses commanded</i> see Lev 14:1-32.</p></p>
<p id="n4100185"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100185">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “as an indictment against them”; or “as proof to the people.” This phrase could be taken as referring to a positive witness to the priests, a negative testimony against them, or as a testimony to the community that the man had indeed been cured. In any case, the testimony shows that Jesus is healing and ministering to those in need.</p></p>
<p id="n4100186"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100186">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the man who was healed) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100187"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100187">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100188"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100188">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and”; <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) often has a mildly contrastive force, as here.</p></p>
<p id="n4100189"><a href="file999.xhtml#n4100189">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb has been translated iteratively.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
