<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Illustration of Justification</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> What then shall we say that Abraham, our ancestor according to the flesh,<sup><a id="n450041" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n450041">1</a></sup> has discovered regarding this matter?<sup><a id="n450042" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n450042">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:2</span> For if Abraham was declared righteous<sup><a id="n450043" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n450043">3</a></sup> by works, he has something to boast about—but not before God. <span class="verse">4:3</span> For what does the scripture say? “<i><b>Abraham believed God, and it was credited</b></i><sup><a id="n450044" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n450044">4</a></sup> <b><i>to him as righteousness</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n450045" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n450045">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:4</span> Now to the one who works, his pay is not credited due to grace but due to obligation.<sup><a id="n450046" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n450046">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:5</span> But to the one who does not work, but believes in the one who declares the ungodly righteous,<sup><a id="n450047" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n450047">7</a></sup> his faith is credited as righteousness. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:6</span> So even David himself speaks regarding the blessedness of the man to whom God credits righteousness apart from works: </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">4:7</span> “<b><i>Blessed</i></b><sup><a id="n450048" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n450048">8</a></sup> <b><i>are those whose lawless deeds are forgiven, and whose sins are covered;</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">4:8</span> <b><i>blessed is the one</i></b><sup><a id="n450049" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n450049">9</a></sup> <b><i>against whom the Lord will never count</i></b><sup><a id="n4500410" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500410">10</a></sup> <i><b>sin</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4500411" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500411">11</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:9</span> Is this blessedness<sup><a id="n4500412" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500412">12</a></sup> then for<sup><a id="n4500413" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500413">13</a></sup> the circumcision<sup><a id="n4500414" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500414">14</a></sup> or also for<sup><a id="n4500415" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500415">15</a></sup> the uncircumcision? For we say, “<i>faith <b>was credited to</b> Abraham <b>as</b> <b>righteousness</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4500416" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500416">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:10</span> How then was it credited to him? Was he circumcised at the time, or not? No, he was not circumcised but uncircumcised! <span class="verse">4:11</span> And he received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness that he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised,<sup><a id="n4500417" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500417">17</a></sup> so that he would become<sup><a id="n4500418" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500418">18</a></sup> the father of all those who believe but have never been circumcised,<sup><a id="n4500419" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500419">19</a></sup> that they too could have righteousness credited to them. <span class="verse">4:12</span> And he is also the father of the circumcised,<sup><a id="n4500420" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500420">20</a></sup> who are not only circumcised, but who also walk in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham possessed when he was still uncircumcised.<sup><a id="n4500421" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500421">21</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:13</span> For the promise<sup><a id="n4500422" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500422">22</a></sup> to Abraham or to his descendants that he would inherit the world was not fulfilled through the law, but through the righteousness that comes by faith. <span class="verse">4:14</span> For if they become heirs by the law, faith is empty and the promise is nullified.<sup><a id="n4500423" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500423">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:15</span> For the law brings wrath, because where there is no law there is no transgression<sup><a id="n4500424" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500424">24</a></sup> either. <span class="verse">4:16</span> For this reason it is by faith so that it may be by grace,<sup><a id="n4500425" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500425">25</a></sup> with the result that the promise may be certain to all the descendants—not only to those who are under the law, but also to those who have the faith of Abraham,<sup><a id="n4500426" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500426">26</a></sup> who is the father of us all <span class="verse">4:17</span> (as it is written, “<b><i>I have made you the father of many nations</i></b>”).<sup><a id="n4500427" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500427">27</a></sup> He is our father<sup><a id="n4500428" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500428">28</a></sup> in the presence of God whom he believed—the God who<sup><a id="n4500429" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500429">29</a></sup> makes the dead alive and summons the things that do not yet exist as though they already do.<sup><a id="n4500430" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500430">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:18</span> Against hope Abraham<sup><a id="n4500431" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500431">31</a></sup> believed<sup><a id="n4500432" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500432">32</a></sup> in hope with the result that he became <b><i>the father of many nations</i></b><sup><a id="n4500433" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500433">33</a></sup> according to the pronouncement,<sup><a id="n4500434" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500434">34</a></sup> “<b><i>so will your descendants be</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4500435" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500435">35</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:19</span> Without being weak in faith, he considered<sup><a id="n4500436" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500436">36</a></sup> his own body as dead<sup><a id="n4500437" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500437">37</a></sup> (because he was about 100 years old) and the deadness of Sarah’s womb. <span class="verse">4:20</span> He<sup><a id="n4500438" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500438">38</a></sup> did not waver in unbelief about the promise of God but was strengthened in faith, giving glory to God. <span class="verse">4:21</span> He was<sup><a id="n4500439" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500439">39</a></sup> fully convinced that what God<sup><a id="n4500440" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500440">40</a></sup> promised he was also able to do. <span class="verse">4:22</span> So indeed it was credited to Abraham<sup><a id="n4500441" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500441">41</a></sup> as righteousness. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:23</span> But the statement <b><i>it was credited to him</i></b><sup><a id="n4500442" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500442">42</a></sup> was not written only for Abraham’s<sup><a id="n4500443" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500443">43</a></sup> sake, <span class="verse">4:24</span> but also for our sake, to whom it will be credited, those who believe in the one who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead. <span class="verse">4:25</span> He<sup><a id="n4500444" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500444">44</a></sup> was given over<sup><a id="n4500445" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500445">45</a></sup> because of our transgressions and was raised for the sake of<sup><a id="n4500446" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500446">46</a></sup> our justification.<sup><a id="n4500447" href="file1095_notes.xhtml#n4500447">47</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>