<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 10</h2>
<p id="n460101"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n460101">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ignorant.”</p></p>
<p id="n460102"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n460102">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n460103"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n460103">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ A number of witnesses, some of them significant, have the passive <span class="greek">ἐβαπτίσθησαν</span> (<span class="translit">ebaptisthēsan</span>, “were baptized”) instead of the middle <span class="greek">ἐβαπτίσαντο</span> (<span class="translit">ebaptisanto</span>, “baptized [themselves]”) in v. 2 (so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 <i>al</i> latt). However, the middle is not without its representation (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46c</sup> B 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> Or; the original hand of <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> read the imperfect middle <span class="greek">ἐβαπτίζοντο</span> [<span class="translit">ebaptizonto</span>]). The passive looks like a motivated reading in that it is clearer and conforms to typical Pauline usage (his thirteen instances of the verb are all either active or passive). B. M. Metzger, in representing a minority opinion of the UBS Committee, suggests that the middle would have been appropriate for Jewish baptism in which the convert baptizes himself (<i>TCGNT</i> 493). But this assumes that the middle is a <i>direct</i> middle, a rare occurrence in the NT (and never elsewhere with this verb). Further, it is not really baptism that is in view in v. 2, but passing through the Red Sea (thus, a metaphorical use). Although the present editors agree with the minority’s resultant reading, it is better to take the middle as causative/permissive and the scribes as changing it to a passive for clarity’s sake. Translational differences are minimal, though some exegetical implications are involved (see <i>ExSyn</i> 427). </p></p>
<p id="n460104"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n460104">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “play” may refer to idolatrous, sexual play here, although that is determined by the context rather than the meaning of the word itself (cf. BDAG 750 s.v. <span class="greek">παίζω</span>).</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 32:6. </p></p>
<p id="n460105"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n460105">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> This incident is recorded in Num 25:1-9.</p></p>
<p id="n460106"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n460106">6</a> <p><b>tc</b> <span class="greek">Χριστόν</span> (<span class="translit">Christon</span>, “Christ”) is attested in the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, including many significant witnesses of the Alexandrian (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> 1739 1881) and Western (D F G) text-forms, and other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> and versions (<span class="greek">Ψ</span> latt sy co). On the other hand, some of the significant Alexandrian witnesses have <span class="greek">κύριον</span> (<span class="translit">kurion</span>, “Lord”; <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C P 33 104 1175 <i>al</i>). A few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A 81) have <span class="greek">θεόν</span> (<span class="translit">theon</span>, “God”). The <i>nomina sacra</i> for these readings are quite similar (<span class="uncial">cMn</span>, <span class="uncial">kMn</span>, and <span class="uncial">qMn</span> respectively), so one might be able to account for the different readings by way of confusion. On closer examination, the variants appear to be intentional changes. Alexandrian scribes replaced the highly specific term “Christ” with the less specific terms “Lord” and “God” because in the context it seems to be anachronistic to speak of the exodus generation putting <i>Christ</i> to the test. If the original had been “Lord,” it seems unlikely that a scribe would have willingly created a difficulty by substituting the more specific “Christ.” Moreover, even if not motivated by a tendency to overcorrect, a scribe might be likely to assimilate the word “Christ” to “Lord” in conformity with Deut 6:16 or other passages. The evidence from the early church regarding the reading of this verse is rather compelling in favor of “Christ.” Marcion, a second-century, anti-Jewish heretic, would naturally have opposed any reference to Christ in historical involvement with Israel, because he thought of the Creator God of the OT as inherently evil. In spite of this strong prejudice, though, Marcion read a text with “Christ.” Other early church writers attest to the presence of the word “Christ,” including Clement of Alexandria and Origen. What is more, the synod of Antioch in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 268 used the reading “Christ” as evidence of the preexistence of Christ when it condemned Paul of Samosata. (See G. Zuntz, <i>The Text of the Epistles</i>, 126-27; <i>TCGNT</i> 494; C. D. Osburn, “The Text of 1 Corinthians 10:9, ” <i>New Testament Textual Criticism: Its Significance for Exegesis</i>, 201-11; <i>contra</i> A. Robertson and A. Plummer, <i>First Corinthians</i> [ICC], 205-6.) Since “Christ” is the more difficult reading on all accounts, it is almost certainly the reading that gave rise to the others. In addition, “Christ” is consistent with Paul’s style in this passage (cf. 10:4, a text in which Marcion also reads “Christ”). This text is also christologically significant, since the reading “Christ” makes an explicit claim to the preexistence of Christ. (The textual critic faces a similar dilemma in Jude 5. In a similar exodus context, some of the more significant Alexandrian <span class="smcaps">mss</span> [A B 33 81] and the Vulgate read “Jesus” in place of “Lord.” Two of those <span class="smcaps">mss</span> [A 81] are the same <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that have “God” instead of “Christ” in 1 Cor 10:9. See the <b>tc</b> notes on Jude 5 for more information.) In sum, “Christ” has all the earmarks of authenticity here and should be considered the autographic reading.</p></p>
<p id="n460107"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n460107">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> This incident is recorded in Num 21:5-9.</p></p>
<p id="n460108"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n460108">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the destroyer.” BDAG 703 s.v. <span class="greek">ὀλοθρευτῆς</span> mentions the corresponding OT references and notes, “the one meant is the destroying angel as the one who carries out the divine sentence of punishment, or perh. Satan.”</p><p><b>sn</b> This incident is recorded in Num 16:41-50.</p></p>
<p id="n460109"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n460109">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “except a human one” or “except one common to humanity.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601010"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n4601010">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God is faithful who.” The relative pronoun was changed to a personal pronoun in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4601011"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n4601011">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to bear” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. They have been supplied in the translation to clarify the meaning.</p></p>
<p id="n4601012"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n4601012">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Israel according to (the) flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601013"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n4601013">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “what they sacrifice”; the referent (the pagans) is clear from the context and has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4601014"><a href="file1118.xhtml#n4601014">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The question in Greek expects a negative answer (“We are not stronger than he is, are we?”).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
