<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Timothy 1</h2>
<p id="n550011"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n550011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul.” The word “from” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n550012"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n550012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the promise…” or possibly “in accordance with the promise…”</p></p>
<p id="n550013"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n550013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from my ancestors.”</p></p>
<p id="n550014"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n550014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “as I do constantly. By night and day I long to see you…”</p></p>
<p id="n550015"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n550015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “longing to see you, remembering your tears” (as a continuation of the preceding clause). Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n550016"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n550016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “recalling” (as a continuation of the preceding clause). Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n550017"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n550017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the sincere faith in you.”</p></p>
<p id="n550018"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n550018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “convinced.”</p></p>
<p id="n550019"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n550019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that is in you.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500110"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a spirit,” denoting the human personality under the Spirit’s influence as in 1 Cor 4:21; Gal 6:1; 1 Pet 3:4. But the reference to the Holy Spirit at the end of this section (1:14) makes it likely that it begins this way also, so that the Holy Spirit is the referent.</p></p>
<p id="n5500111"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the testimony of our Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500112"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “according to.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500113"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “suffer hardship together,” implying “join with me in suffering.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500114"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> More literally, “who saved us,” as a description of God in v. 8. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5500115"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “according to,” or “by.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500116"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “before eternal times.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500117"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having broken…and having brought…” (describing Christ). Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here (and at the beginning of v. 11) in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5500118"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for which.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500119"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500119">19</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> C D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1241 1505 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> latt sy co) have <span class="greek">ἐθνῶν</span> (<span class="translit">ethnōn</span>, “of the Gentiles”) after “teacher” (<span class="greek">διδάσκαλος</span> [<span class="translit">didaskalos</span> ]). The shorter reading has poorer external credentials (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A I 1175), though codex 33 has a reading apparently generated from <span class="greek">διδάσκαλος</span> alone (<span class="greek">διάκονος</span> (<span class="translit">diakonos</span>, “servant”]). The “teacher” without adjunct is preferred both because <span class="greek">ἐθνῶν</span> probably represents a gloss added by scribes familiar with 1 Tim 2:7 and because there is no easy explanation for the omission of <span class="greek">ἐθνῶν</span> if it were original here.</p></p>
<p id="n5500120"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “suffer these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500121"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in whom I have believed.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500122"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500122">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>What has been entrusted to me</i> (<i>Grk</i> “my entrustment,” meaning either (1) “what I have entrusted to him” [his life, destiny, etc.] or (2) “what he has entrusted to me” [the truth of the gospel]). The parallel with v. 14 and use of similar words in the pastorals (1 Tim 6:20; 2 Tim 2:2) argue for the latter sense.</p></p>
<p id="n5500123"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500123">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>That day</i> is a reference to the day when Paul would stand before Christ to give account for his service (cf. 2 Tim 1:18; 1 Cor 3:13; 2 Cor 5:9-10).</p></p>
<p id="n5500124"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “pattern.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500125"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in faith and love in Christ Jesus.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>With the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus</i>. This describes the manner in which Timothy must hold to the standard (similar to Paul’s call for him to give attention to his life and his teaching in 1 Tim 4:11-16).</p></p>
<p id="n5500126"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500126">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>That good thing</i> (<i>Grk</i> “the good deposit”) refers to the truth of the gospel committed to Timothy (cf. 1 Tim 6:20).</p></p>
<p id="n5500127"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n5500128"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my chain.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500130"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500130">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>That day</i> is a reference to the day when Onesiphorus (v. 16) stands before Christ to give account for his service (cf. v. 12; 1 Cor 3:13; 2 Cor 5:9-10).</p></p>
<p id="n5500131"><a href="file1181.xhtml#n5500131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all the ways he served in Ephesus.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
