<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 12</h2>
<p id="n440121"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n440121">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>King Herod</i> was Herod Agrippa I, the grandson of Herod I (Herod the Great). His mediocre career is summarized in Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 18-19. This event took place in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 42 or 43.</p></p>
<p id="n440122"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n440122">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “King Herod had some from the church arrested.”</p></p>
<p id="n440123"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n440123">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to cause them injury.”</p></p>
<p id="n440124"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n440124">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>executed with a sword</i> probably refers to a beheading. James was the first known apostolic martyr (Eusebius, <i>Eccl. Hist</i>. 2.9.1-3). On James, not the Lord’s brother, see Luke 5:10; 6:14. This death ended a short period of peace noted in Acts 9:31 after the persecution mentioned in 8:1-3.</p></p>
<p id="n440125"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n440125">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> This could be a reference to the Jewish people (so CEV) or to the Jewish leaders (so NLT). The statement in v. 4 that Herod intended to bring Peter “out to the people” (i.e., for a public trial) may suggest the former is somewhat more likely.</p></p>
<p id="n440126"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n440126">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n440127"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n440127">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Four squads of soldiers</i>. Each <i>squad</i> was a detachment of four soldiers.</p></p>
<p id="n440128"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n440128">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “guard him, planning to bring him out.” The Greek construction continues with a participle (<span class="greek">βουλόμενος</span>, <span class="translit">boulomenos</span>) and an infinitive (<span class="greek">ἀναγαγεῖν</span>, <span class="translit">anagagein</span>), but this creates an awkward and lengthy sentence in English. Thus a reference to Herod was introduced as subject and the participle translated as a finite verb (“Herod planned”).</p></p>
<p id="n440129"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n440129">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “intended”; <i>Grk</i> “wanted.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401210"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to bring him out to the people,” but in this context a public trial (with certain condemnation as the result) is doubtless what Herod planned. L&amp;N 15.176 translates this phrase “planning to bring him up for a public trial after the Passover.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401211"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “constantly.” This term also appears in Luke 22:14 and Acts 26:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4401212"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but earnest prayer was being made by the church to God for him.” The order of the clauses has been rearranged to follow English style, and the somewhat awkward passive “prayer was being made” has been changed to the simpler active verb “were praying.” Luke portrays what follows as an answer to prayer.</p></p>
<p id="n4401213"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “was going to bring him out,” but the upcoming trial is implied. See Acts 12:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4401214"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “two chains, and.” Logically it makes better sense to translate this as a temporal clause, although technically it is a coordinate clause in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n4401215"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “were guarding.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401216"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. The interjection <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>), often difficult to translate into English, expresses the suddenness of the angel’s appearance.</p></p>
<p id="n4401217"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the angel of the Lord.” See the note on the word “Lord” in 5:19. </p></p>
<p id="n4401218"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “striking the side of Peter, he awoke him saying.” The term refers to a push or a light tap (BDAG 786 s.v. <span class="greek">πατάσσω</span> 1.a). The participle <span class="greek">πατάξας</span> (<span class="translit">pataxas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401219"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (Peter) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401220"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the hands,” but the wrist was considered a part of the hand.</p></p>
<p id="n4401221"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> While <span class="greek">ζώννυμι</span> (<span class="translit">zōnnumi</span>) sometimes means “to dress,” referring to the fastening of the belt or sash as the final act of getting dressed, in this context it probably does mean “put on your belt” since in the conditions of a prison Peter had probably not changed into a different set of clothes to sleep. More likely he had merely removed his belt or sash, which the angel now told him to replace. The translation “put on your belt” is given by L&amp;N 49.14 for this verse. The archaic English “girdle” for the sash or belt has an entirely different meaning today.</p></p>
<p id="n4401222"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Peter) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401223"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401224"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “outer garment.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401225"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And going out he followed.” </p></p>
<p id="n4401226"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Peter going out followed him.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐξελθών</span> (<span class="translit">exelthōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401227"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “him” is not in the Greek text. Direct objects in Greek were often omitted when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4401228"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “what was done through the angel was a reality” (see BDAG 43 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀληθής</span> 3).</p></p>
<p id="n4401229"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “guard posts.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401230"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401230">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>iron gate</i> shows how important security was here. This door was more secure than one made of wood (which would be usual).</p></p>
<p id="n4401231"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which.” The relative pronoun (“which”) was replaced by the pronoun “it,” and a new sentence was begun in the translation at this point to improve the English style, due to the length of the sentence in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n4401232"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here, <span class="greek">αὐτομάτη</span> (<span class="translit">automatē</span>), indicates something that happens without visible cause (BDAG 152 s.v. <span class="greek">αὐτόματος</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401233"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “lane,” “alley” (BDAG 907 s.v. <span class="greek">ῥύμη</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401234"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401235"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “delivered.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401236"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401236">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here <i>the hand of Herod</i> is a metaphor for Herod’s power or control.</p></p>
<p id="n4401237"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401237">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>King Herod</i> was Herod Agrippa I, the grandson of Herod I (Herod the Great).</p></p>
<p id="n4401238"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401238">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> Luke characterizes the opposition here as <i>the Jewish people</i>, including their leadership (see 12:3).</p></p>
<p id="n4401239"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Peter) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401240"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401240">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “John who was also called Mark.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>John Mark</i> becomes a key figure in Acts 12:25; 13:5, 13; 15:37-39.</p></p>
<p id="n4401241"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “responded.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401242"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “informed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401243"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “them” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects in Greek were often omitted when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4401244"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401244">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>“You’ve lost your mind!”</i> Such a response to the miraculous is not unusual in Luke-Acts. See Luke 24:11; Acts 26:25. The term <span class="greek">μαίνομαι</span> (<span class="translit">mainomai</span>) can have the idea of being “raving mad” or “totally irrational” (BDAG 610 s.v.). It is a strong expression.</p></p>
<p id="n4401245"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “she kept insisting that the situation was thus” (cf. BDAG 422 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔχω</span> 10.a). Most translations supply a less awkward English phrase like “it was so”; the force of her insistence, however, is that “it was Peter,” which was the point under dispute.</p></p>
<p id="n4401246"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> The two imperfect tense verbs, <span class="greek">διϊσχυρίζετο</span> (<span class="translit">diischurizeto</span>) and <span class="greek">ἔλεγον</span> (<span class="translit">elegon</span>), are both taken iteratively. The picture is thus virtually a shouting match between Rhoda and the rest of the believers.</p></p>
<p id="n4401247"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401247">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> The assumption made by those inside, “<i>It is his angel</i>,” seems to allude to the idea of an attending angel (cf. Gen 48:16 LXX; Matt 18:10; <i>Test. Jacob</i> 1:10).</p></p>
<p id="n4401248"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the door” are not in the Greek text, but are implied (see Acts 12:13).</p></p>
<p id="n4401249"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401249">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> That they were <i>greatly astonished</i> is a common response in Luke-Acts to God’s work (Luke 8:56; Acts 2:7, 12; 8:13; 9:21; 10:45).</p></p>
<p id="n4401250"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401250">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “He gave them a signal.” <i>Grk</i> “Giving them a signal…he related to them.” The participle <span class="greek">κατασείσας</span> (<span class="translit">kataseisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401251"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401251">51</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, including some of the most important ones (B D E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy), read <span class="greek">αὐτοῖς</span> (<span class="translit">autois</span>, “to them”) here, while some excellent and early witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45vid,74vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A 33 81 945 1739) lack the pronoun. Although it is possible that the pronoun was deleted because it was seen as superfluous, it is also possible that it was added as a natural expansion on the text, strengthening the connection between Peter and his listeners. Although a decision is difficult, the shorter reading is slightly preferred. NA<sup>28</sup> puts the pronoun in brackets, indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401252"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401252">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “led.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401253"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401253">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He…went to another place</i>. This is Peter’s last appearance in Acts with the exception of the Jerusalem council in Acts 15.</p></p>
<p id="n4401254"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401254">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 436 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡμέρα</span> 1.a has “<i>day is breaking</i>” for <span class="greek">ἡμέρα γίνεται</span> (<span class="translit">hēmera ginetai</span>) in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401255"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401255">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “no little consternation.” The translation given for <span class="greek">τάραχος</span> (<span class="translit">tarachos</span>) in this verse by BDAG 991 s.v. <span class="greek">τάραχος</span> 1 is “<i>mental agitation</i>.” The situation indicated by the Greek word is described in L&amp;N 25.243 as “a state of acute distress and great anxiety, with the additional possible implications of dismay and confusion—‘great distress, extreme anxiety.’” The English word “consternation” is preferred here because it conveys precisely such a situation of anxiety mixed with fear. The reason for this anxiety is explained in the following verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401256"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401256">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>King Herod</i> was Herod Agrippa I, the grandson of Herod I (Herod the Great).</p></p>
<p id="n4401257"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401257">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “had instigated a search” (Herod would have ordered the search rather than conducting it himself).</p></p>
<p id="n4401258"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401258">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Questioned” is used to translate <span class="greek">ἀνακρίνας</span> (<span class="translit">anakrinas</span>) here because a possible translation offered by BDAG 66 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνακρίνω</span> for this verse is “<i>examined</i>,” which could be understood to mean Herod <i>inspected</i> the guards rather than questioned them. The translation used by the NIV, “cross-examined,” also avoids this possible misunderstanding.</p></p>
<p id="n4401259"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401259">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> The meaning “<i>led away to execution</i>” for <span class="greek">ἀπαχθῆναι</span> (<span class="translit">apachthēnai</span>) in this verse is given by BDAG 95 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπάγω</span> 2.c. Although an explicit reference to execution is lacking here, it is what would usually occur in such a case (Acts 16:27; 27:42; <i>Code of Justinian</i> 9.4.4). “Led away to torture” is a less likely option (Pliny the Younger, <i>Letters</i> 10, 96, 8).</p></p>
<p id="n4401260"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401260">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and,” but the sequence of events is better expressed in English by “then.” A new sentence is begun in the translation because of the length of the sentence in Greek, which exceeds normal English sentence length.</p></p>
<p id="n4401261"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401261">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Herod) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Since Herod has been the subject of the preceding material, and the circumstances of his death are the subject of the following verses (20-23), it is best to understand Herod as the subject here. This is especially true since according to Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 19.8.2 [19.343-352], Herod Agrippa I died at Caesarea in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 44, and vv. 20-23 here describe his death. Thus the end of v. 19 provides Luke’s transition to explain how Herod got from Jerusalem to Caesarea where he died. In spite of all this evidence, the NRSV translates this phrase “Then Peter went down from Judea to Caesarea and stayed there,” understanding the referent to be Peter rather than Herod Agrippa I.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>King Herod</i> was Herod Agrippa I, the grandson of Herod I (Herod the Great), who died at Caesarea in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 44 according to Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 19.8.2 [19.343-352].</p></p>
<p id="n4401262"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401262">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4401263"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401263">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Herod) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Herod</i> was Herod Agrippa I, the grandson of Herod I (Herod the Great).</p></p>
<p id="n4401264"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401264">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was extremely angry.” L&amp;N 33.453 gives the meaning “be angry and quarrel, quarrel angrily” here. However, in L&amp;N 88.180 the alternative “to be violently angry, to be furious” is given. The term is used only once in the NT (BDAG 461 s.v. <span class="greek">θυμομαχέω</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401265"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401265">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Tyre</i> was a city and seaport on the coast of Phoenicia.</p></p>
<p id="n4401266"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401266">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Sidon</i> was an ancient Phoenician royal city on the coast between Berytus (Beirut) and Tyre (BDAG 923 s.v. <span class="greek">Σιδών</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401267"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401267">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with one accord.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401268"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401268">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “persuading.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401269"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401269">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term translated “personal assistant” BDAG 554 s.v. <span class="greek">κοιτῶν</span> states, “used as part of a title: <span class="greek">ὁ ἐπὶ τοῦ κοιτῶνος</span> <i>the one in charge of the bed-chamber, the chamberlain</i>.” This individual was not just a domestic servant or butler, but a highly respected person who had considerable responsibility for the king’s living quarters and personal affairs. The English word “chamberlain” corresponds very closely to this meaning but is not in common use today. The term “personal assistant,” while it might convey more business associations than management of personal affairs, nevertheless communicates the concept well in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n4401270"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401270">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to help them” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4401271"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401271">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for a reconciliation.” There were grave political risks in having Herod angry at them. The detail shows the ruler’s power.</p></p>
<p id="n4401272"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401272">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Herod) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Herod</i> was Herod Agrippa I, the grandson of Herod I (Herod the Great).</p></p>
<p id="n4401273"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401273">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “apparel.” On Herod’s robes see Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 19.8.2 (19.344), summarized in the note at the end of v. 23.</p></p>
<p id="n4401274"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401274">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although BDAG 175 s.v. <span class="greek">βῆμα</span> 3 gives the meaning “<i>speaker</i>’<i>s platform</i>” for this verse, and a number of modern translations use similar terms (“rostrum,” NASB; “platform,” NRSV), since the <i>bema</i> was a standard feature in Greco-Roman cities of the time, there is no need for an alternative translation here.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>judgment seat</i> (<span class="greek">βῆμα</span>, <span class="translit">bēma</span>) was a raised platform mounted by steps and sometimes furnished with a seat, used by officials in addressing an assembly or making pronouncements, often on judicial matters. The judgment seat was a familiar item in Greco-Roman culture, often located in the <i>agora</i>, the public square or marketplace in the center of a city.</p></p>
<p id="n4401275"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401275">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “delivered a public address.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401276"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401276">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “<i>crowd</i>” is given by BDAG 223 s.v. <span class="greek">δῆμος</span>; the word often means a gathering of citizens to conduct public business. Here it is simply the group of people gathered to hear the king’s speech.</p></p>
<p id="n4401277"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401277">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐπεφώνει</span> (<span class="translit">epephōnei</span>) is taken ingressively in the sequence of events. Presumably the king had started his speech when the crowd began shouting.</p></p>
<p id="n4401278"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401278">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The voice of a god</i>. Contrast the response of Paul and Barnabas in Acts 14:13-15.</p></p>
<p id="n4401279"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401279">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the angel of the Lord.” See the note on the word “Lord” in 5:19. </p></p>
<p id="n4401280"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401280">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> On being <i>struck…down</i> by an angel, see Acts 23:3; 1 Sam 25:38; 2 Sam 12:15; 2 Kgs 19:35; 2 Chr 13:20; 2 Macc 9:5.</p></p>
<p id="n4401281"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401281">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Herod) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401282"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401282">82</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He was eaten by worms and died</i>. Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 19.8.2 (19.343-352), states that Herod Agrippa I died at Caesarea in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 44. The account by Josephus, while not identical to Luke’s account, is similar in many respects: On the second day of a festival, Herod Agrippa appeared in the theater with a robe made of silver. When it sparkled in the sun, the people cried out flatteries and declared him to be a god. The king, carried away by the flattery, saw an owl (an omen of death) sitting on a nearby rope, and immediately was struck with severe stomach pains. He was carried off to his house and died five days later. The two accounts can be reconciled without difficulty, since while Luke states that Herod was immediately struck down by an angel, his death could have come several days later. The mention of <i>worms</i> with death adds a humiliating note to the scene. The formerly powerful ruler had been thoroughly reduced to nothing (cf. Jdt 16:17; 2 Macc 9:9; cf. also Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 17.6.5 [17.168-170], which details the sickness which led to Herod the Great’s death). </p></p>
<p id="n4401283"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401283">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> A metonymy for the number of adherents to God’s word.</p></p>
<p id="n4401284"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401284">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “spreading.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401285"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401285">85</a> <p><b>tc</b> There are a number of variants at this point in the text: <span class="greek">εἰς</span> (<span class="translit">eis</span>, “to”) in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B <span class="apparatus">M</span> sa<sup>ms</sup> sy<sup>hmg</sup>; <span class="greek">ἀπό</span> (<span class="translit">apo</span>, “from”) in D E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 36 323 453 614 1175 <i>al</i>; <span class="greek">ἐξ</span> (<span class="translit">ex</span>, “from”) in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> A 33 945 1739 <i>al</i>; <span class="greek">ἐξ ᾿Ιερουσαλήμ εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν</span> (<span class="translit">ex Ierousalēm eis Antiocheian</span>, “from Jerusalem to Antioch”) in a few later manuscripts and part of the Itala. A decision on this problem is very difficult, but for several reasons <span class="greek">εἰς</span> can be preferred. It is the most difficult reading by far in light of the context, since Paul and Barnabas were going to Jerusalem in 11:30. It is found in better witnesses, <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> and B being very strong evidence. The other readings, <span class="greek">ἐξ</span> and <span class="greek">ἀπό</span>, are different from <span class="greek">εἰς</span> yet bear essentially the same meaning as each other; this seems to suggest that scribes had problems with <span class="greek">εἰς</span> and tried to choose an acceptable revision. If <span class="greek">εἰς</span> is the earliest reading, <span class="greek">ἀπό</span> may be a clarification of <span class="greek">ἐξ</span>, and <span class="greek">ἐξ</span> could have arisen through confusion of letters. Or <span class="greek">ἐξ</span> and <span class="greek">ἀπό</span> could both have independently arisen from <span class="greek">εἰς</span> as a more acceptable preposition. Despite such arguments, however, the case for <span class="greek">εἰς</span> is not airtight: either <span class="greek">ἐξ</span> or <span class="greek">ἀπό</span> could be preferred on other lines of reasoning. The reading <span class="greek">ἐξ</span> enjoys the earliest support, and <span class="greek">εἰς</span> could have arisen through the same confusion of letters mentioned above. The immediate and wider context seems to mitigate against <span class="greek">εἰς</span> as the original reading: The aorist participle <span class="greek">πληρώσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">plērōsantes</span>, “when they had completed”) seems to signal the end of the mission to Jerusalem with the famine relief, so it would make sense in the context for the team to be coming <i>from</i> Jerusalem (to Antioch) rather than <i>to</i> Jerusalem, and 13:1 certainly presents the scene at Antioch. The later addition <span class="greek">εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν</span> after <span class="greek">᾿Ιερουσαλήμ</span> in some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> seems to be a clarification in light of 13:1 (notice that some of the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that read <span class="greek">ἐξ</span> add <span class="greek">εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν</span> [945 1739], and some that read <span class="greek">ἀπό</span> also add <span class="greek">εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν</span> [E 323 1175]). Thus, the idea of spatial separation from Jerusalem is strongly implied by the context. This problem is so difficult that some scholars resort to conjectural emendation to determine the original reading. All in all, the reading <span class="greek">εἰς</span> should be preferred as that of the initial text, recognizing that there is a good measure of uncertainty with this solution. For additional discussion, see <i>TCGNT</i> 350-52.</p></p>
<p id="n4401286"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401286">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, <i>from Jerusalem</i> to Antioch (see Acts 11:29-30).</p></p>
<p id="n4401287"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401287">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fulfilled.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401288"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401288">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ministry” or “service.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401289"><a href="file1074.xhtml#n4401289">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “John who was also called Mark.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
