<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Hebrews 6</h2>
<p id="n580061"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n580061">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Therefore leaving behind.” The implication is not of abandoning this elementary information, but of building on it. </p></p>
<p id="n580062"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n580062">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “basic.”</p></p>
<p id="n580063"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n580063">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the message of the beginning of Christ.”</p></p>
<p id="n580064"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n580064">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “leaving behind…let us move on.”</p></p>
<p id="n580065"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n580065">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> It is clear from the context that the phrase “dead works” are works that need to be repented from and thus are sins. The same phrase occurs in Heb 9:14 in which the author of Hebrews states that our consciences need to be purified from them. As Bruce states, they are works “that belong to the way of death and not the way of life” (F. F. Bruce, <i>Hebrews</i> [NICNT], 138).</p></p>
<p id="n580066"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n580066">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Hebrews 9:10 and Mark 7:4 for other references to the Jewish practice of ritual washings.</p></p>
<p id="n580067"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n580067">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and we will do this.”</p></p>
<p id="n580068"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n580068">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “have fallen away.”</p></p>
<p id="n580069"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n580069">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “while”; <i>Grk</i> “crucifying…and holding.” The Greek participles here (“crucifying…and holding”) can be understood as either causal (“since”) or temporal (“while”).</p></p>
<p id="n5800610"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “recrucifying the son of God for themselves.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800611"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “comes upon.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800612"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “near to a curse.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800613"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dull.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800614"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in blessing I will bless you and in multiplying I will multiply you,” the Greek form of a Hebrew idiom showing intensity.</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 22:17.</p></p>
<p id="n5800615"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; in the translation the referent (Abraham) has been specified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5800616"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἄνθρωποι</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpoi</span>) is used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women, and is thus translated “people.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800617"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by something greater”; the rest of the comparison (“than themselves”) is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n5800618"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the oath for confirmation is an end of all dispute.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800619"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800620"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “immutable” (here and in v. 18); <i>Grk</i> “the unchangeableness of his purpose.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800621"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have taken refuge”; the basis of that refuge is implied in the preceding verse.</p></p>
<p id="n5800622"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800622">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>curtain</i> refers to the veil or drape in the temple that separated the holy place from the holy of holies.</p></p>
<p id="n5800623"><a href="file1197.xhtml#n5800623">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 110:4, picked up again from Heb 5:6, 10.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
