<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Titus 1</h2>
<p id="n560011"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n560011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul.” The word “from” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n560012"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n560012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “servant” or “bondservant.” Though <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) is normally translated “servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. Also, many slaves in the Roman world became slaves through Rome’s subjugation of conquered nations, kidnapping, or by being born into slave households. </p><p><b>sn</b> Undoubtedly the background for the concept of being the Lord’s slave or servant is to be found in the Old Testament scriptures. For a Jew this concept did not connote drudgery, but honor and privilege. It was used of national Israel at times (Isa 43:10), but was especially associated with famous OT personalities, including such great men as Moses (Josh 14:7), David (Ps 89:3; cf. 2 Sam 7:5, 8) and Elijah (2 Kgs 10:10); all these men were “servants (or slaves) of the Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n560013"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n560013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the faith,” possibly, “in accordance with the faith.”</p></p>
<p id="n560014"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n560014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “before eternal times.”</p></p>
<p id="n560015"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n560015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek text emphasizes the contrast between vv. 2b and 3a: God promised this long ago but now has revealed it in his own time.</p></p>
<p id="n560016"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n560016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if anyone is blameless…” as a continuation of v. 5b, beginning to describe the elder’s character.</p></p>
<p id="n560017"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n560017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “married only once,” “devoted solely to his wife.” See the note on “wife” in 1 Tim 3:2; also 1 Tim 3:12; 5:9.</p></p>
<p id="n560018"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n560018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “believing children.” The phrase could be translated “believing children,” but the parallel with 1 Tim 3:4 (“keeping his children in control”) argues for the sense given in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n560019"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n560019">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>overseer</i> is another term for the same official position of leadership as the “elder.” This is seen in the interchange of the two terms in this passage and in Acts 20:17, 28, as well as in the parallels between these verses and 1 Tim 3:1-7.</p></p>
<p id="n5600110"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n5600110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as God’s steward.”</p></p>
<p id="n5600111"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n5600111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the faithful message in accordance with the teaching” (referring to apostolic teaching).</p></p>
<p id="n5600112"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n5600112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the healthy teaching” (referring to what was just mentioned).</p></p>
<p id="n5600113"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n5600113">13</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The earliest and best <span class="smcaps">mss</span> lack <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) after <span class="greek">πολλοί</span> (<span class="translit">polloi</span>; so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C P 088 81 104 365 614 629 630 <i>al</i> sy co), though the conjunction is found in several significant witnesses, chiefly of the Western and Byzantine texts (D F G I <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1241 1505 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), giving the sense “<i>also</i> many.” Although it is possible that some scribes omitted the word, thinking it was superfluous, it is also possible that others added the conjunction for clarification. Judging by the pedigree of the witnesses and the inconclusiveness of the internal evidence, the shorter reading is considered to be most likely autographic. NA<sup>28</sup> puts the conjunction in brackets, indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n5600114"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n5600114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those of the circumcision.” Some translations take this to refer to Jewish converts to Christianity (cf. NAB “Jewish Christians”; TEV “converts from Judaism”; CEV “Jewish followers”) while others are less clear (cf. NLT “those who insist on circumcision for salvation”).</p></p>
<p id="n5600115"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n5600115">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> A saying attributed to the poet Epimenides of Crete (6th century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n5600116"><a href="file1186.xhtml#n5600116">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Jewish myths</i> were legendary tales characteristic of the false teachers in Ephesus and Crete. See parallels in 1 Tim 1:4; 4:7; and 2 Tim 4:4.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
