<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 24</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 24</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Destruction of the Temple </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:1</span> Now<sup><a id="n400241" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n400241">1</a></sup> as Jesus was going out of the temple courts and walking away, his disciples came to show him the temple buildings.<sup><a id="n400242" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n400242">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">24:2</span> And he said to them,<sup><a id="n400243" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n400243">3</a></sup> “Do you see all these things? I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n400244" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n400244">4</a></sup> not one stone will be left on another.<sup><a id="n400245" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n400245">5</a></sup> All will be torn down!”<sup><a id="n400246" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n400246">6</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Signs of the End of the Age </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:3</span> As<sup><a id="n400247" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n400247">7</a></sup> he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, his disciples came to him privately and said, “Tell us, when will these things<sup><a id="n400248" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n400248">8</a></sup> happen? And what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the age?” <span class="verse">24:4</span> Jesus answered them,<sup><a id="n400249" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n400249">9</a></sup> “Watch out<sup><a id="n4002410" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002410">10</a></sup> that no one misleads you. <span class="verse">24:5</span> For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’<sup><a id="n4002411" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002411">11</a></sup> and they will mislead many. <span class="verse">24:6</span> You will hear of wars and rumors of wars. Make sure that you are not alarmed, for this must happen, but the end is still to come.<sup><a id="n4002412" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002412">12</a></sup> <span class="verse">24:7</span> For nation will rise up in arms<sup><a id="n4002413" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002413">13</a></sup> against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. And there will be famines and earthquakes<sup><a id="n4002414" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002414">14</a></sup> in various places.<sup><a id="n4002415" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002415">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">24:8</span> All<sup><a id="n4002416" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002416">16</a></sup> these things are the beginning of birth pains. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Persecution of Disciples</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:9</span> “Then they will hand you over to be persecuted and will kill you. You will be hated by all the nations<sup><a id="n4002417" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002417">17</a></sup> because of my name.<sup><a id="n4002418" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002418">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">24:10</span> Then many will be led into sin,<sup><a id="n4002419" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002419">19</a></sup> and they will betray one another and hate one another. <span class="verse">24:11</span> And many false prophets will appear and deceive<sup><a id="n4002420" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002420">20</a></sup> many, <span class="verse">24:12</span> and because lawlessness will increase so much, the love of many will grow cold. <span class="verse">24:13</span> But the person who endures to the end will be saved.<sup><a id="n4002421" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002421">21</a></sup> <span class="verse">24:14</span> And this gospel of the kingdom will be preached throughout the whole inhabited earth as a testimony to all the nations,<sup><a id="n4002422" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002422">22</a></sup> and then the end will come. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Abomination of Desolation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:15</span> “So when you see <i>the abomination of desolation</i><sup><a id="n4002423" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002423">23</a></sup> —spoken about by Daniel the prophet—standing in the holy place” (let the reader understand),<sup><a id="n4002424" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002424">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">24:16</span> “then those in Judea must flee<sup><a id="n4002425" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002425">25</a></sup> to the mountains. <span class="verse">24:17</span> The one on the roof<sup><a id="n4002426" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002426">26</a></sup> must not come down<sup><a id="n4002427" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002427">27</a></sup> to take anything out of his house, <span class="verse">24:18</span> and the one in the field must not turn back to get his cloak. <span class="verse">24:19</span> Woe<sup><a id="n4002428" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002428">28</a></sup> to those who are pregnant and to those who are nursing their babies in those days! <span class="verse">24:20</span> Pray<sup><a id="n4002429" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002429">29</a></sup> that your flight may not be in winter or on a Sabbath. <span class="verse">24:21</span> For then there will be great suffering<sup><a id="n4002430" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002430">30</a></sup> unlike anything that has happened<sup><a id="n4002431" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002431">31</a></sup> from the beginning of the world until now, or ever will happen. <span class="verse">24:22</span> And if those days had not been cut short, no one would be saved. But for the sake of the elect those days will be cut short. <span class="verse">24:23</span> Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’<sup><a id="n4002432" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002432">32</a></sup> or ‘There he is!’ do not believe him. <span class="verse">24:24</span> For false messiahs<sup><a id="n4002433" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002433">33</a></sup> and false prophets will appear and perform great signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, even the elect. <span class="verse">24:25</span> Remember,<sup><a id="n4002434" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002434">34</a></sup> I have told you ahead of time. <span class="verse">24:26</span> So then, if someone<sup><a id="n4002435" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002435">35</a></sup> says to you, ‘Look, he is in the wilderness,’<sup><a id="n4002436" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002436">36</a></sup> do not go out, or ‘Look, he is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe him. <span class="verse">24:27</span> For just like the lightning<sup><a id="n4002437" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002437">37</a></sup> comes from the east and flashes to the west, so the coming of the Son of Man will be. <span class="verse">24:28</span> Wherever the corpse is, there the vultures<sup><a id="n4002438" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002438">38</a></sup> will gather.<sup><a id="n4002439" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002439">39</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Arrival of the Son of Man </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:29</span> “Immediately<sup><a id="n4002440" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002440">40</a></sup> after the suffering<sup><a id="n4002441" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002441">41</a></sup> of those days, <i>the</i> <i>sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven will be shaken</i>.<sup><a id="n4002442" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002442">42</a></sup> <span class="verse">24:30</span> Then<sup><a id="n4002443" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002443">43</a></sup> the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven,<sup><a id="n4002444" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002444">44</a></sup> and<sup><a id="n4002445" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002445">45</a></sup> all the tribes of the earth will mourn. They<sup><a id="n4002446" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002446">46</a></sup> will see <i>the Son of Man arriving on the clouds of heaven</i><sup><a id="n4002447" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002447">47</a></sup> with power and great glory. <span class="verse">24:31</span> And he will send his angels with a loud trumpet blast, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven<sup><a id="n4002448" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002448">48</a></sup> to the other. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Fig Tree </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:32</span> “Learn<sup><a id="n4002449" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002449">49</a></sup> this parable from the fig tree: Whenever its branch becomes tender and puts out its leaves, you know that summer is near. <span class="verse">24:33</span> So also you, when you see all these things, know<sup><a id="n4002450" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002450">50</a></sup> that he is near, right at the door. <span class="verse">24:34</span> I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4002451" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002451">51</a></sup> this generation<sup><a id="n4002452" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002452">52</a></sup> will not pass away until all these things take place. <span class="verse">24:35</span> Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.<sup><a id="n4002453" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002453">53</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Be Ready!</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:36</span> “But as for that day and hour no one knows it—not even the angels in heaven<sup><a id="n4002454" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002454">54</a></sup> —except the Father alone. <span class="verse">24:37</span> For just like the days of Noah<sup><a id="n4002455" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002455">55</a></sup> were, so the coming of the Son of Man will be. <span class="verse">24:38</span> For in those days before the flood, people<sup><a id="n4002456" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002456">56</a></sup> were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day Noah entered the ark. <span class="verse">24:39</span> And they knew nothing until the flood came and took them all away.<sup><a id="n4002457" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002457">57</a></sup> It will be the same at the coming of the Son of Man.<sup><a id="n4002458" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002458">58</a></sup> <span class="verse">24:40</span> Then there will be two men in the field; one will be taken and one left.<sup><a id="n4002459" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002459">59</a></sup> <span class="verse">24:41</span> There will be two women grinding grain with a mill;<sup><a id="n4002460" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002460">60</a></sup> one will be taken and one left. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:42</span> “Therefore stay alert, because you do not know on what day<sup><a id="n4002461" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002461">61</a></sup> your Lord will come. <span class="verse">24:43</span> But understand this: If the owner of the house had known at what time of night the thief<sup><a id="n4002462" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002462">62</a></sup> was coming, he would have been alert and would not have let his house be broken into. <span class="verse">24:44</span> Therefore you also must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour when you do not expect him.<sup><a id="n4002463" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002463">63</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Faithful and Wise Slave</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">24:45</span> “Who then is the faithful and wise slave,<sup><a id="n4002464" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002464">64</a></sup> whom the master has put in charge of his household, to give the other slaves<sup><a id="n4002465" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002465">65</a></sup> their food at the proper time? <span class="verse">24:46</span> Blessed is that slave whom the master finds at work<sup><a id="n4002466" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002466">66</a></sup> when he comes. <span class="verse">24:47</span> I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4002467" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002467">67</a></sup> the master<sup><a id="n4002468" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002468">68</a></sup> will put him in charge of all his possessions. <span class="verse">24:48</span> But if<sup><a id="n4002469" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002469">69</a></sup> that evil slave should say to himself,<sup><a id="n4002470" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002470">70</a></sup> ‘My master is staying away a long time,’ <span class="verse">24:49</span> and he begins to beat his fellow slaves and to eat and drink with drunkards, <span class="verse">24:50</span> then the master of that slave will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he does not foresee, <span class="verse">24:51</span> and will cut him in two,<sup><a id="n4002471" href="file993_notes.xhtml#n4002471">71</a></sup> and assign him a place with the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. </p>

</body>
</html>