<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Mark 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feeding of the Four Thousand </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> In those days there was another large crowd with nothing to eat. So<sup><a id="n410081" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n410081">1</a></sup> Jesus<sup><a id="n410082" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n410082">2</a></sup> called his disciples and said to them, <span class="verse">8:2</span> “I have compassion on the crowd, because they have already been here with me three days, and they have nothing to eat. <span class="verse">8:3</span> If I send them home hungry, they will faint on the way, and some of them have come from a great distance.” <span class="verse">8:4</span> His disciples answered him, “Where can someone get enough bread in this desolate place to satisfy these people?” <span class="verse">8:5</span> He asked them, “How many loaves do you have?” They replied, “Seven.” <span class="verse">8:6</span> Then<sup><a id="n410083" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n410083">3</a></sup> he directed the crowd to sit down on the ground. After he took the seven loaves and gave thanks, he broke them and began giving them to the disciples to serve. So<sup><a id="n410084" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n410084">4</a></sup> they served the crowd. <span class="verse">8:7</span> They also had a few small fish. After giving thanks for these, he told them to serve these as well. <span class="verse">8:8</span> Everyone<sup><a id="n410085" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n410085">5</a></sup> ate and was satisfied, and they picked up the broken pieces left over, seven baskets full. <span class="verse">8:9</span> There were about 4,000<sup><a id="n410086" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n410086">6</a></sup> who ate.<sup><a id="n410087" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n410087">7</a></sup> Then he dismissed them.<sup><a id="n410088" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n410088">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">8:10</span> Immediately he got into a boat<sup><a id="n410089" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n410089">9</a></sup> with his disciples and went to the district of Dalmanutha.<sup><a id="n4100810" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100810">10</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Demand for a Sign </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:11</span> Then the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4100811" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100811">11</a></sup> came and began to argue with Jesus, asking for<sup><a id="n4100812" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100812">12</a></sup> a sign from heaven<sup><a id="n4100813" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100813">13</a></sup> to test him. <span class="verse">8:12</span> Sighing deeply in his spirit he said, “Why does this generation look for a sign? I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4100814" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100814">14</a></sup> no sign will be given to this generation.” <span class="verse">8:13</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100815" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100815">15</a></sup> he left them, got back into the boat, and went to the other side. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Yeast of the Pharisees and Herod </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:14</span> Now<sup><a id="n4100816" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100816">16</a></sup> they had forgotten to take bread, except for one loaf they had with them in the boat. <span class="verse">8:15</span> And Jesus<sup><a id="n4100817" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100817">17</a></sup> ordered them,<sup><a id="n4100818" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100818">18</a></sup> “Watch out! Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4100819" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100819">19</a></sup> and the yeast of Herod!” <span class="verse">8:16</span> So they began to discuss with one another about having no bread.<sup><a id="n4100820" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100820">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">8:17</span> When he learned of this,<sup><a id="n4100821" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100821">21</a></sup> Jesus said to them, “Why are you arguing<sup><a id="n4100822" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100822">22</a></sup> about having no bread? Do you still not see or understand? Have your hearts been hardened? <span class="verse">8:18</span> Though you have eyes, don’t you see? And though you have ears, can’t you hear?<sup><a id="n4100823" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100823">23</a></sup> Don’t you remember? <span class="verse">8:19</span> When I broke the five loaves for the 5,000, how many baskets full of pieces did you pick up?” They replied, “Twelve.” <span class="verse">8:20</span> “When I broke the seven loaves for the 4,000, how many baskets full of pieces did you pick up?” They replied,<sup><a id="n4100824" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100824">24</a></sup> “Seven.” <span class="verse">8:21</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100825" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100825">25</a></sup> he said to them, “Do you still not understand?”<sup><a id="n4100826" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100826">26</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Two-stage Healing</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:22</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100827" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100827">27</a></sup> they came to Bethsaida. They brought a blind man to Jesus<sup><a id="n4100828" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100828">28</a></sup> and asked him to touch him. <span class="verse">8:23</span> He took the blind man by the hand and brought him outside of the village. Then<sup><a id="n4100829" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100829">29</a></sup> he spit on his eyes, placed his hands on his eyes<sup><a id="n4100830" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100830">30</a></sup> and asked, “Do you see anything?” <span class="verse">8:24</span> Regaining his sight<sup><a id="n4100831" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100831">31</a></sup> he said, “I see people, but they look like trees walking.” <span class="verse">8:25</span> Then Jesus<sup><a id="n4100832" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100832">32</a></sup> placed his hands on the man’s<sup><a id="n4100833" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100833">33</a></sup> eyes again. And he opened his eyes,<sup><a id="n4100834" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100834">34</a></sup> his sight was restored, and he saw everything clearly. <span class="verse">8:26</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100835" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100835">35</a></sup> sent him home, saying, “Do not even go into the village.”<sup><a id="n4100836" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100836">36</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Peter’s Confession </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:27</span> Then Jesus and his disciples went to the villages of Caesarea Philippi. On the way he asked his disciples,<sup><a id="n4100838" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100838">38</a></sup> “Who do people say that I am?” <span class="verse">8:28</span> They said,<sup><a id="n4100839" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100839">39</a></sup> “John the Baptist, others say Elijah,<sup><a id="n4100840" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100840">40</a></sup> and still others, one of the prophets.” <span class="verse">8:29</span> He asked them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter answered him,<sup><a id="n4100841" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100841">41</a></sup> “You are the Christ.”<sup><a id="n4100842" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100842">42</a></sup> <span class="verse">8:30</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100843" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100843">43</a></sup> he warned them not to tell anyone about him.<sup><a id="n4100844" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100844">44</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">First Prediction of Jesus’ Death and Resurrection </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:31</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100845" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100845">45</a></sup> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100846" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100846">46</a></sup> began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer<sup><a id="n4100847" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100847">47</a></sup> many things and be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and experts in the law,<sup><a id="n4100848" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100848">48</a></sup> and be killed, and after three days rise again. <span class="verse">8:32</span> He spoke openly about this. So<sup><a id="n4100849" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100849">49</a></sup> Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. <span class="verse">8:33</span> But after turning and looking at his disciples, he rebuked Peter and said, “Get behind me, Satan. You are not setting your mind on God’s interests, but on man’s.”<sup><a id="n4100850" href="file1006_notes.xhtml#n4100850">50</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>