<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Timothy 2</h2>
<p id="n540021"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n540021">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “petitions.”</p></p>
<p id="n540022"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n540022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all men,” but here <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>) is used generically, referring to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n540023"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n540023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> For “even for kings” the Greek says simply “for kings.”</p></p>
<p id="n540024"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n540024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this”; the referent (such prayer for all, referring to vv. 1-2) is specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n540025"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n540025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who wants…” (but showing why such prayer is pleasing to God).</p></p>
<p id="n540026"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n540026">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all men,” but here <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπους</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpous</span>) is used generically, referring to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n540027"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n540027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally this word (<span class="greek">μεσίτης</span>, <span class="translit">mesitēs</span>) is rendered “mediator,” but this conveys a wrong impression in contemporary English. Jesus was not a mediator, for example, who worked for compromise between opposing parties. Instead he was the only one able to go between man and God to enable them to have a relationship, but entirely on God’s terms.</p></p>
<p id="n540028"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n540028">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “one mediator between God and mankind, the human, Christ Jesus.” </p></p>
<p id="n540029"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n540029">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Revealing God’s purpose at his appointed time</i> is a difficult expression without clear connection to the preceding, literally “a testimony at the proper time.” This may allude to testimony about Christ’s atoning work given by Paul and others (as v. 7 mentions). But it seems more likely to identify Christ’s death itself as a testimony to God’s gracious character (as vv. 3-4 describe). This testimony was planned from all eternity, but now has come to light at the time God intended, in the work of Christ. See 2 Tim 1:9-10; Titus 2:11-14; 3:4-7 for similar ideas. </p></p>
<p id="n5400210"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400210">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* D<sup>2</sup> H 33<sup>vid</sup> 1241 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i>) have <span class="greek">ἐν Χριστῷ</span> (<span class="translit">en Christō</span>) after <span class="greek">λέγω</span> (<span class="translit">legō</span>) to read “I am telling the truth in Christ,” but this is probably an assimilation to Rom 9:1. Further, the witnesses that lack this phrase are early, significant, and well distributed (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A D* F G P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 6 81 1175 1739 1881 <i>al</i> lat sy co). It is difficult to explain the shorter reading if it is not authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n5400211"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word translated “men” here (<span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span>, <span class="translit">anēr</span>) refers to adult males, not people in general. Note the command given to “the women” in v. 9.</p></p>
<p id="n5400212"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400212">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To pray</i>. In this verse Paul resumes and concludes the section about prayer begun in 2:1-2. 1 Tim 2:3-7 described God’s concern for all people as the motive for such prayer.</p></p>
<p id="n5400213"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400213">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul uses a common ancient posture in prayer (<i>lifting up holy hands</i>) as a figure of speech for offering requests from a holy life (<i>without anger or dispute</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n5400214"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400214">14</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most witnesses have <span class="greek">καὶ τάς</span> (<span class="translit">kai tas</span>; so D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1241 1505 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i>) or simply <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D* F G 6 365 1739) after <span class="greek">ὡσαύτως</span> (<span class="translit">hōsautōs</span>). A few significant witnesses lack such words (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A H P 33 81 1175). The evidence is for the most part along “party” lines, with the shortest reading being found in the Alexandrian text, the conjunction in the Western, and the longest reading in the Byzantine tradition. Externally, the shortest reading is preferred. However, there is a good chance of homoiomeson or homoioteleuton in which case <span class="greek">καί</span> or <span class="greek">καὶ τάς</span> could have accidentally been omitted (note the <span class="greek">αι</span> [<span class="translit">ai</span>] and <span class="greek">αι ας</span> [<span class="translit">ai as</span>] in the word that follows, written here in majuscule script): <span class="uncial">wsautwskaigunaikas</span> / <span class="uncial">wsautwskaitasgunaikas</span>. Nevertheless, since both the <span class="greek">καί</span> and <span class="greek">καὶ τάς</span> are predictable variants, intended to fill out the meaning of the text, the shortest reading seems best able to explain the rise of the others. NA<sup>28</sup> has the <span class="greek">καί</span> in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity. </p></p>
<p id="n5400215"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to adorn themselves.” Grammatically the phrase “to adorn themselves” continues the author’s words in v. 8: “I want…likewise the women to adorn themselves.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400216"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> This word and its cognates are used frequently in the Pastoral Epistles. It means “moderation,” “sobriety,” “decency,” “sensibleness,” or “sound judgment.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400217"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Literally a continuation of v. 9a, “not with braided hair…” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5400218"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “receive instruction.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400219"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400219">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>But I do not allow</i>. Although the Greek conjunction <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) can have a simple connective force (“and”), it is best to take it as contrastive here: Verse 11 gives a positive statement (that is to say, that a woman should <i>learn</i>). This was a radical and liberating departure from the Jewish view that women were not to learn the law.</p></p>
<p id="n5400220"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to BDAG 150 s.v. <span class="greek">αὐθεντέω</span> this Greek verb means “to assume a stance of independent authority, <i>give orders to, dictate to</i>” (cf. JB “tell a man what to do”).</p></p>
<p id="n5400221"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but to be in quietness.” The phrase <span class="greek">ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ</span> (<span class="translit">en hēsuchia</span>) is used in Greek literature either of absolute silence or of a quiet demeanor.</p></p>
<p id="n5400222"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> This phrase uses a compound form of the same verb as in v. 14a: “deceived” vs. “deceived out, completely deceived.” The two verbs could be synonymous, but because of the close contrast in this context, it seems that a stronger meaning is intended for the second verb.</p></p>
<p id="n5400223"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has come to be in transgression” (with an emphasis on the continuing consequences of that fall).</p></p>
<p id="n5400224"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “But she will be preserved through childbearing,” or “But she will be saved in spite of childbearing.” This verse is notoriously difficult to interpret, though there is general agreement about one point: Verse 15 is intended to lessen the impact of vv. 13-14. There are several interpretive possibilities here, though the first three can be readily dismissed (cf. D. Moo, “1 Timothy 2:11-15: Meaning and Significance,” <i>TJ</i> 1 [1980]: 70-73). (1) Christian women will be saved, but only if they bear children. This view is entirely unlikely for it lays a condition on Christian women that goes beyond grace, is unsupported elsewhere in scripture, and is explicitly against Paul’s and Jesus’ teaching on both marriage and salvation (cf. Matt 19:12; 1 Cor 7:8-9, 26-27, 34-35; 1 Tim 5:3-10). (2) Despite the curse, Christian women will be kept safe when bearing children. This view also is unlikely, both because it has little to do with the context and because it is not true to life (especially life in the ancient world with its high maternal mortality rate while giving birth). (3) Despite the sin of Eve and the results to her progeny, she would be saved through <i>the</i> childbirth—that is, through the birth of the Messiah, as promised in the <i>protevangelium</i> (Gen 3:15). This view sees the singular “she” as referring first to Eve and then to all women (note the change from singular to plural in this verse). Further, it works well in the context. However, there are several problems with it: [a] The future tense (<span class="greek">σωθήσηται</span>, <span class="translit">sōthēsētai</span>) is unnatural if referring to the <i>protevangelium</i> or even to the historical fact of the Messiah’s birth; [b] that only women are singled out as recipients of salvation seems odd since the birth of the Messiah was necessary for the salvation of both women <i>and</i> men; [c] as ingenious as this view is, its very ingenuity is its downfall, for it is overly subtle; and [d] the term <span class="greek">τεκνογονία</span> (<span class="translit">teknogonia</span>) refers to the <i>process</i> of childbirth rather than the <i>product</i>. And since it is the person of the Messiah (the product of the birth) that saves us, the term is unlikely to be used in the sense given it by those who hold this view. There are three other views that have greater plausibility: (4) This may be a somewhat veiled reference to the curse of Gen 3:16 in order to clarify that though the woman led the man into transgression (v. 14b), she will be saved spiritually despite this physical reminder of her sin. The phrase is literally “through childbearing,” but this does not necessarily denote means or instrument here. Instead it may show attendant circumstance (probably with a concessive force): “with, though accompanied by” (cf. BDAG 224 s.v. <span class="greek">δία</span> A.3.c; Rom 2:27; 2 Cor 2:4; 1 Tim 4:14). (5) “It is not through active teaching and ruling activities that Christian women will be saved, but through faithfulness to their proper role, exemplified in motherhood” (Moo, 71). In this view <span class="greek">τεκνογονία</span> is seen as a synecdoche in which child-<i>rearing</i> and other activities of motherhood are involved. Thus, one <i>evidence</i> (though clearly not an <i>essential</i> evidence) of a woman’s salvation may be seen in her decision to function in this role. (6) The verse may point to some sort of proverbial expression now lost, in which “saved” means “delivered” and in which this deliverance was from some of the devastating effects of the role reversal that took place in Eden. The idea of childbearing, then, is a metonymy of part for the whole that encompasses the woman’s submission again to the leadership of the man, though it has no specific soteriological import (but it certainly would have to do with the outworking of redemption).</p></p>
<p id="n5400225"><a href="file1175.xhtml#n5400225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is a shift to the plural here (<i>Grk</i> “if they continue”), but it still refers to the woman in a simple shift from generic singular to generic plural.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
