<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 17</h2>
<p id="n440171"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n440171">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 250 s.v. <span class="greek">διοδεύω</span> 1 has “<i>go, travel through</i>” for this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n440172"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n440172">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Amphipolis</i>. The capital city of the southeastern district of Macedonia (BDAG 55 s.v. <span class="greek">᾿Αμφίπολις</span>). It was a military post. From Philippi this was about 33 mi (53 km).</p></p>
<p id="n440173"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n440173">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Apollonia</i> was a city in Macedonia about 27 mi (43 km) west southwest of Amphipolis.</p></p>
<p id="n440174"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n440174">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Thessalonica</i> (modern Salonica) was a city in Macedonia about 33 mi (53 km) west of Apollonia. It was the capital of Macedonia. The road they traveled over was called the <i>Via Egnatia</i>. It is likely they rode horses, given their condition in Philippi. The implication of v. 1 is that the two previously mentioned cities lacked a synagogue.</p></p>
<p id="n440175"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n440175">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n440176"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n440176">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he went in to them”; the referent (the Jews in the synagogue) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n440177"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n440177">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the word <span class="greek">διελέξατο</span> (<span class="translit">dielexato</span>; from <span class="greek">διαλέγομαι</span>, <span class="translit">dialegomai</span>) is frequently translated “reasoned,” “disputed,” or “argued,” this sense comes from its classical meaning where it was used of philosophical disputation, including the Socratic method of questions and answers. However, there does not seem to be contextual evidence for this kind of debate in Acts 17:2. As G. Schrenk (<i>TDNT</i> 2:94-95) points out, “What is at issue is the address which any qualified member of a synagogue might give.” Other examples of this may be found in the NT in Matt 4:23 and Mark 1:21.</p></p>
<p id="n440178"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n440178">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 772 s.v. <span class="greek">παρατίθημι</span> 2.b has “<i>demonstrate, point out</i>” here.</p></p>
<p id="n440179"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n440179">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:31.</p></p>
<p id="n4401710"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401710">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Christ had to suffer and to rise from the dead</i>. These two points (suffering and resurrection) would have been among the more controversial aspects of Paul’s messianic preaching. The term translated “had to” (<span class="greek">δεῖ</span>, <span class="translit">dei</span>) shows how divine design and scripture corresponded here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401711"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401711">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek words used here (<span class="greek">καὶ ὅτι</span>, <span class="translit">kai hoti</span>, “and that”) mark the switch from indirect to direct discourse. Contemporary English requires the use of an introductory verb of speaking or saying to make this transition.</p></p>
<p id="n4401712"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401712">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:31. The identification of the Messiah with <i>Jesus</i> indicates Paul was proclaiming the fulfillment of messianic promise.</p></p>
<p id="n4401713"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401713">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “convinced.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401714"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401714">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a large crowd.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401715"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401715">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of devout Greeks,” but this is practically a technical term for the category called <i>God-fearers</i>, Gentiles who worshiped the God of Israel and in many cases kept the Mosaic law, but did not take the final step of circumcision necessary to become a proselyte to Judaism. See further K. G. Kuhn, <i>TDNT</i> 6:732-34, 743-44. Luke frequently mentions such people (Acts 13:43, 50; 16:14; 17:17; 18:7).</p></p>
<p id="n4401716"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401716">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not a few”; this use of negation could be misleading to the modern English reader, however, and so has been translated as “quite a few” (which is the actual meaning of the expression).</p></p>
<p id="n4401717"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401717">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “becoming jealous.” The participle <span class="greek">ζηλώσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">zēlōsantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. So elsewhere in Acts (5:17; 7:9; 13:45).</p></p>
<p id="n4401718"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401718">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Literally <span class="greek">ἀγοραῖος</span> (<span class="translit">agoraios</span>) refers to the crowd in the marketplace, although BDAG 14-15 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀγοραῖος</span> 1 gives the meaning, by extension, as “<i>rabble</i>.” Such a description is certainly appropriate in this context. L&amp;N 15.127 translates the phrase “worthless men from the streets.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401719"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401719">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term, which is a NT <i>hapax legomenon</i>, see BDAG 745 s.v. <span class="greek">ὀχλοποιέω</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4401720"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 458 s.v. <span class="greek">θορυβέω</span> 1 has “<i>set the city in an uproar</i>, <i>start a riot in the city</i>” for the meaning of <span class="greek">ἐθορύβουν</span> (<span class="translit">ethoruboun</span>) in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401721"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401721">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> The attack took place at <i>Jason’s house</i> because this was probably the location of the new house church.</p></p>
<p id="n4401722"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401722">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “them”; the referents (Paul and Silas) have been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401723"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401723">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 223 s.v. <span class="greek">δῆμος</span> 2 has “in a Hellenistic city, a convocation of citizens called together for the purpose of transacting official business, <i>popular assembly</i> <span class="greek">προάγειν εἰς τὸν δ</span>. Ac 17:5.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401724"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401724">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 977-78 s.v. <span class="greek">σύρω</span> on this verb. It was used in everyday speech of dragging in fish by a net, or dragging away someone’s (presumably) dead body (Paul in Acts 14:19).</p></p>
<p id="n4401725"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401725">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 37.93 defines <span class="greek">πολιτάρχης</span> (<span class="translit">politarchēs</span>) as “a public official responsible for administrative matters within a town or city and a member of the ruling council of such a political unit—‘city official’” (see also BDAG 845 s.v.).</p></p>
<p id="n4401726"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401726">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rebellion.” BDAG 72 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναστατόω</span> has “<i>disturb, trouble, upset</i>,” but in light of the references in the following verse to political insurrection, “stirred up rebellion” would also be appropriate.</p></p>
<p id="n4401727"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401727">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the empire.” This was a way of referring to the Roman empire (BDAG 699 s.v. <span class="greek">οἰκουμένη</span> 2.b).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Throughout the world</i>. Note how some of those present had knowledge of what had happened elsewhere. Word about Paul and his companions and their message was spreading.</p></p>
<p id="n4401728"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401728">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whom.” Because of the awkwardness in English of having two relative clauses follow one another (“who have stirred up trouble…whom Jason has welcomed”) the relative pronoun here (“whom”) has been replaced by the conjunction “and,” creating a clause that is grammatically coordinate but logically subordinate in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4401729"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401729">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and they.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun.</p></p>
<p id="n4401730"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401730">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the emperor’s” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p></p>
<p id="n4401731"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401731">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “named” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401732"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401732">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Acting…saying…Jesus</i>. The charges are serious, involving sedition (Luke 23:2). If the political charges were true, Rome would have to react.</p></p>
<p id="n4401733"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401733">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They troubled the crowd and the city officials,” but this could be understood to mean “they bothered” or “they annoyed.” In reality the Jewish instigators managed to instill doubt and confusion into both the mob and the officials by their false charges of treason. Verse 8 suggests the charges raised again Paul, Silas, Jason, and the others were false.</p></p>
<p id="n4401734"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401734">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 37.93 defines <span class="greek">πολιτάρχης</span> (<span class="translit">politarchēs</span>) as “a public official responsible for administrative matters within a town or city and a member of the ruling council of such a political unit—‘city official.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4401735"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401735">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401736"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401736">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the city officials) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401737"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401737">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “a payment” or “a pledge of security” (BDAG 472 s.v. <span class="greek">ἱκανός</span> 1) for which “bail” is the most common contemporary English equivalent.</p></p>
<p id="n4401738"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401738">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Berea</i> (alternate spelling in NRSV <i>Beroea</i>; Greek <span class="translit">Beroia</span>) was a very old city in Macedonia on the river Astraeus about 45 mi (75 km) west of Thessalonica.</p></p>
<p id="n4401739"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401739">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who arriving there, went to.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (<span class="greek">οἵτινες</span>, <span class="translit">hoitines</span>) has been left untranslated and a new English sentence begun. The participle <span class="greek">παραγενόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">paragenomenoi</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4401740"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401740">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4401741"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401741">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “These”; the referent (the Jews in the synagogue at Berea) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401742"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401742">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “more willing to learn.” L&amp;N 27.48 and BDAG 404 s.v. <span class="greek">εὐγενής</span> 2 both use the term “open-minded” here. The point is that they were more receptive to Paul’s message.</p></p>
<p id="n4401743"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401743">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Thessalonica</i> was a city in Macedonia (modern Salonica).</p></p>
<p id="n4401744"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401744">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “willingly,” “readily”; <i>Grk</i> “with all eagerness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401745"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401745">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who received.” Here the relative pronoun (“who”) has been translated as a pronoun (“they”) preceded by a semicolon, which is less awkward in contemporary English than a relative clause at this point.</p></p>
<p id="n4401746"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401746">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb (BDAG 66 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνακρίνω</span> 1) refers to careful examination.</p></p>
<p id="n4401747"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401747">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 437 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡμέρα</span> 2.c has “<i>every day</i>” for this phrase in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401748"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401748">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not a few”; this use of negation could be misleading to the modern English reader, however, and so has been translated as “quite a few” (which is the actual meaning of the expression).</p></p>
<p id="n4401749"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401749">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “respected.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401750"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401750">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Thessalonica</i> was a city in Macedonia (modern Salonica).</p></p>
<p id="n4401751"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401751">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that the word of God had also been proclaimed by Paul.” This passive construction has been converted to an active one in the translation for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4401752"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401752">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 911 s.v. <span class="greek">σαλεύω</span> 2 has “<i>incite</i>” for <span class="greek">σαλεύοντες</span> (<span class="translit">saleuontes</span>) in Acts 17:13.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Inciting</i>. Ironically, it was the Jews who were disturbing the peace, not the Christians.</p></p>
<p id="n4401753"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401753">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “stirring up” (BDAG 990-91 s.v. <span class="greek">ταράσσω</span> 2). The point is the agitation of the crowds.</p></p>
<p id="n4401754"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401754">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the sea.” Here <span class="greek">ἕως ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν</span> (<span class="translit">heōs epi tēn thalassan</span>) must mean “to the edge of the sea,” that is, “to the coast.” Since there is no mention of Paul taking a ship to Athens, he presumably traveled overland. The journey would have been about 340 mi (550 km).</p></p>
<p id="n4401755"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401755">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “remained there”; the referent (Berea) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401757"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401757">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They left</i>. See 1 Thess 3:1-2, which shows they went from here to Thessalonica.</p></p>
<p id="n4401759"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401759">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “greatly upset within him,” but the words “within him” were not included in the translation because they are redundant in English. See L&amp;N 88.189. The term could also be rendered “infuriated.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>His spirit was greatly upset</i>. See Rom 1:18-32 for Paul’s feelings about idolatry. Yet he addressed both Jews and Gentiles with tact and reserve.</p></p>
<p id="n4401760"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401760">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “when he saw.” The participle <span class="greek">θεωροῦντος</span> (<span class="translit">theōrountos</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle; it could also be translated as temporal.</p></p>
<p id="n4401761"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401761">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the word <span class="greek">διελέξατο</span> (<span class="translit">dielexato</span>; from <span class="greek">διαλέγομαι</span>, <span class="translit">dialegomai</span>) is frequently translated “reasoned,” “disputed,” or “argued,” this sense comes from its classical meaning where it was used of philosophical disputation, including the Socratic method of questions and answers. However, there does not seem to be contextual evidence for this kind of debate in Acts 17:17. As G. Schrenk (<i>TDNT</i> 2:94-95) points out, “What is at issue is the address which any qualified member of a synagogue might give.” Other examples of this may be found in the NT in Matt 4:23 and Mark 1:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4401762"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401762">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the devout,” but this is practically a technical term for the category called <i>God-fearers</i>, Gentiles who worshiped the God of Israel and in many cases kept the Mosaic law, but did not take the final step of circumcision necessary to become a proselyte to Judaism. See further K. G. Kuhn, <i>TDNT</i> 6:732-34, 743-44, and the note on the phrase “God-fearing Greeks” in 17:4. </p></p>
<p id="n4401763"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401763">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in Acts 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4401764"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401764">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>marketplace</i> in Acts 16:19.</p></p>
<p id="n4401765"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401765">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 437 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡμέρα</span> 2.c has “<i>every day</i>” for this phrase in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401766"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401766">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> An <i>Epicurean</i> was a follower of the philosophy of Epicurus, who founded a school in Athens about 300 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> Although the Epicureans saw the aim of life as pleasure, they were not strictly hedonists, because they defined pleasure as the absence of pain. Along with this, they desired the avoidance of trouble and freedom from annoyances. They saw organized religion as evil, especially the belief that the gods punished evildoers in an afterlife. In keeping with this, they were unable to accept Paul’s teaching about the resurrection.</p></p>
<p id="n4401767"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401767">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>Stoic</i> was a follower of the philosophy founded by Zeno (342-270 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span>), a Phoenician who came to Athens and modified the philosophical system of the Cynics he found there. The Stoics rejected the Epicurean ideal of pleasure, stressing virtue instead. The Stoics emphasized responsibility for voluntary actions and believed risks were worth taking, but thought the actual attainment of virtue was difficult. They also believed in providence.</p></p>
<p id="n4401768"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401768">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 956 s.v. <span class="greek">συμβάλλω</span> 1 has “<i>converse, confer</i>” here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401769"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401769">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401770"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401770">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “ignorant show-off.” The traditional English translation of <span class="greek">σπερμολόγος</span> (<span class="translit">spermologos</span>) is given in L&amp;N 33.381 as “foolish babbler.” However, an alternate view is presented in L&amp;N 27.19, “(a figurative extension of meaning of a term based on the practice of birds in picking up seeds) one who acquires bits and pieces of relatively extraneous information and proceeds to pass them off with pretense and show—‘ignorant show-off, charlatan.’” A similar view is given in BDAG 937 s.v. <span class="greek">σπερμολόγος</span>: “in pejorative imagery of persons whose communication lacks sophistication and seems to pick up scraps of information here and there <i>scrapmonger,</i> scavenger…Engl. synonyms include ‘gossip’, ‘babbler’, chatterer’; but these terms miss the imagery of unsystematic gathering.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401771"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401771">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> The meaning of this phrase is not clear. Literally it reads “strange deities” (see BDAG 210 s.v. <span class="greek">δαιμόνιον</span> 1). The note of not being customary is important. In the ancient world what was new was suspicious. The plural <span class="greek">δαιμονίων</span> (<span class="translit">daimoniōn</span>, “deities”) shows the audience grappling with Paul’s teaching that God was working through Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4401772"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401772">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4401773"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401773">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401774"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401774">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the council of the Areopagus.” See also the term in v. 22.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>Areopagus</i> has been traditionally understood as reference to a rocky hill near the Acropolis in Athens, although this place may well have been located in the marketplace at the foot of the hill (L&amp;N 93.412; BDAG 129 s.v. <span class="greek">῎Αρειος πάγος</span>). This term does not refer so much to the place, however, as to the advisory council of Athens known as the <i>Areopagus</i>, which dealt with ethical, cultural, and religious matters, including the supervision of education and controlling the many visiting lecturers. Thus it could be translated <i>the council of the Areopagus</i>. See also the term in v. 22.</p></p>
<p id="n4401775"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401775">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 684 s.v. <span class="greek">ξενίζω</span> 2 translates the substantival participle <span class="greek">ξενίζοντα</span> (<span class="translit">xenizonta</span>) as “<i>astonishing things</i> Ac 17:20.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401776"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401776">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these things,” but since the referent (“surprising things”) is so close, the repetition of “these things” sounds redundant in English, so the pronoun “they” was substituted in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4401777"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401777">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ηὐκαίρουν</span> (<span class="translit">ēukairoun</span>) has been translated as a customary or habitual imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4401778"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401778">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 406-7 s.v. <span class="greek">εὐκαιρέω</span> has “<i>used to spend their time in nothing else than telling</i> Ac 17:21.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401779"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401779">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author. The reference to newness may be pejorative.</p></p>
<p id="n4401780"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401780">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “standing…said.” The participle <span class="greek">ζηλώσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">zēlōsantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401781"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401781">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">δεισιδαιμονεστέρους</span> (<span class="translit">deisidaimonesterous</span>) is difficult. On the one hand it can have the positive sense of “devout,” but on the other hand it can have the negative sense of “superstitious” (BDAG 216 s.v. <span class="greek">δεισιδαίμων</span>). As part of a laudatory introduction (the technical rhetorical term for this introduction was <i>capatatio</i>), the term is probably positive here. It may well be a “backhanded” compliment, playing on the ambiguity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401782"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401782">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 513 s.v. <span class="greek">κατά</span> B.6 translates the phrase <span class="greek">κατὰ πάντα</span> (<span class="translit">kata panta</span>) as “<i>in all respects</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401783"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401783">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “your sanctuaries.” L&amp;N 53.54 gives “sanctuary” (place of worship) as an alternate meaning for the word <span class="greek">σεβάσματα</span> (<span class="translit">sebasmata</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401784"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401784">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on which was written,” but since it would have been carved in stone, it is more common to speak of an “inscription” in English. To simplify the English the relative construction with a passive verb (“on which was inscribed”) was translated as a prepositional phrase with a substantive (“inscription”).</p></p>
<p id="n4401785"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401785">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 13 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀγνοέω</span> 1.b has “Abs. <span class="greek">ὅ ἀγνοοῦντες εὐσεβεῖτε</span> <i>what you worship without knowing it</i> (on the subject matter Maximus Tyr. 11, 5e: all sorts of philosophers <span class="greek">ἴσασιν οὐκ ἑκόντες καὶ λέγουσιν ἄκοντες</span> sc. <span class="greek">τὸ θεῖον</span> = they know and name God without intending to do so) Ac 17:23.” Paul, in typical Jewish Christian style, informs them of the true God, of whom their idols are an ignorant reflection.</p></p>
<p id="n4401786"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401786">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all the things that are in it.” The speech starts with God as Creator, like 14:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4401787"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401787">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because he is.” The participle <span class="greek">ὑπάρχων</span> (<span class="translit">huparchōn</span>) could be either adjectival, modifying <span class="greek">οὗτος</span> (<span class="translit">houtos</span>, “who is Lord…”) or adverbial of cause (“because he is Lord…”). Since the participle <span class="greek">διδούς</span> (<span class="translit">didous</span>) in v. 25 appears to be clearly causal in force, it is preferable to understand <span class="greek">ὑπάρχων</span> as adjectival in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4401788"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401788">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the statement <i>does not live in temples made by human hands</i> compare Acts 7:48. This has implications for idols as well. God cannot be represented by them or, as the following clause also suggests, <i>served by human hands</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4401789"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401789">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 57.45 has “nor does he need anything more that people can supply by working for him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401790"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401790">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he himself gives to all [people] life and breath and all things.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401791"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401791">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>one man</i> refers to Adam (the word “man” is understood).</p></p>
<p id="n4401792"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401792">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “mankind.” BDAG 276 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔθνος</span> 1 has “<i>every nation of humankind</i> Ac 17:26.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401793"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401793">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to live over all the face of the earth.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401794"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401794">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 884-85 s.v. <span class="greek">προστάσσω</span> has “(<span class="greek">οἱ</span>)<span class="greek"> προστεταγμένοι καιροί</span> <i>(the) fixed times</i> Ac 17:26” here, but since the following phrase is also translated “fixed limits,” this would seem redundant in English, so the word “set” has been used instead.</p></p>
<p id="n4401795"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401795">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the boundaries of their habitation.” L&amp;N 80.5 has “fixed limits of the places where they would live” for this phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n4401796"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401796">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 1097-98 s.v. <span class="greek">ψηλαφάω</span>, which lists “<i>touch, handle</i>” and “<i>to feel around for, grope for</i>” as possible meanings.</p></p>
<p id="n4401797"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401797">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Perhaps grope around for him and find him</i>. The pagans’ struggle to know God is the point here. Conscience alone is not good enough.</p></p>
<p id="n4401798"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401798">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ὑπάρχοντα</span> (<span class="translit">huparchonta</span>) has been translated as a concessive adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4401799"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n4401799">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to L&amp;N 15.1, “A strictly literal translation of <span class="greek">κινέω</span> in Ac 17:28 might imply merely moving from one place to another. The meaning, however, is generalized movement and activity; therefore, it may be possible to translate <span class="greek">κινούμεθα</span> as ‘we come and go’ or ‘we move about’ or even ‘we do what we do.’”</p></p>
<p id="n44017100"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017100">100</a> <p><b>sn</b> This quotation is from Aratus (ca. 310-245 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span>), <i>Phaenomena</i> 5. Paul asserted a general relationship and accountability to God for all humanity.</p></p>
<p id="n44017101"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the divine being.” BDAG 446 s.v. <span class="greek">θεῖος</span> 1.b has “<i>divine being, divinity</i>” here.</p></p>
<p id="n44017102"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a likeness.” Again idolatry is directly attacked as an affront to God and a devaluation of him.</p></p>
<p id="n44017103"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the skill and imagination of man,” but <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπου</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpou</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n44017104"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “craftsmanship” (cf. BDAG 1001 s.v. <span class="greek">τέχνη</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n44017105"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “thought.” BDAG 336 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐνθύμησις</span> has “<i>thought, reflection, idea</i>” as the category of meaning here, but in terms of creativity (as in the context) the imaginative faculty is in view.</p></p>
<p id="n44017106"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has deliberately paid no attention to.”</p></p>
<p id="n44017107"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “times when people did not know.”</p></p>
<p id="n44017108"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἀνθρώποις</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpois</span>) has been translated as a generic noun (“people”).</p></p>
<p id="n44017109"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017109">109</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He now commands all people everywhere to repent</i>. God was now asking all mankind to turn to him. No nation or race was excluded.</p></p>
<p id="n44017110"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “fixed.”</p></p>
<p id="n44017111"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017111">111</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The world</i> refers to the whole inhabited earth.</p></p>
<p id="n44017112"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “appointed.” BDAG 723 s.v. <span class="greek">ὁρίζω</span> 2.b has “of persons <i>appoint, designate, declare</i>: God judges the world <span class="greek">ἐν ἀνδρὶ ᾧ ὥρισεν</span> <i>through a man whom he has appointed</i> Ac 17:31.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>A man whom he designated</i>. Jesus is put in the position of eschatological judge. As judge of the living and the dead, he possesses divine authority (Acts 10:42).</p></p>
<p id="n44017113"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἀναστήσας</span> (<span class="translit">anastēsas</span>) indicates means here.</p></p>
<p id="n44017114"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἀκούσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">akousantes</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n44017115"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 33.408 has “some scoffed (at him) Ac 17:32” for <span class="greek">ἐχλεύαζον</span> (<span class="translit">echleuazon</span>) here; the imperfect verb has been translated as an ingressive imperfect (“began to scoff”).</p></p>
<p id="n44017116"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “left out of their midst”; the referent (the Areopagus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44017117"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the Greek word here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which normally refers to males, husbands, etc., in this particular context it must have a generic force similar to that of <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>), since “a woman named Damaris” is mentioned specifically as being part of this group (cf. BDAG 79 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> 1.a).</p></p>
<p id="n44017118"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “joining him, believed.” The participle <span class="greek">κολληθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">kollēthentes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. On the use of this verb in Acts, see 5:13; 8:29; 9:26; 10:28.</p></p>
<p id="n44017119"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “among whom.” Due to the length of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) has been translated as a third person plural pronoun (“them”) and a new sentence begun in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n44017120"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Areopagite” (a member of the council of the Areopagus). The noun “Areopagite” is not in common usage today in English. It is clearer to use a descriptive phrase “a member of the Areopagus” (L&amp;N 11.82). However, this phrase alone can be misleading in English: “Dionysius, a member of the Areopagus, and a woman named Damaris” could be understood to refer to three people (Dionysius, an unnamed member of the Areopagus, and Damaris) rather than only two. Converting the descriptive phrase to a relative clause in English (“who was a member of the Areopagus”) removes the ambiguity.</p></p>
<p id="n44017121"><a href="file1079.xhtml#n44017121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and a woman,” but this <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
