<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Ephesians 2</h2>
<p id="n490021"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n490021">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> The adverbial participle “being” (<span class="greek">ὄντας</span>, <span class="translit">ontas</span>) is taken concessively.</p></p>
<p id="n490022"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n490022">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> Chapter 2 starts off with a participle, <i>although you were dead</i>, that is left dangling. The syntax in Greek for vv. 1-3 constitutes one incomplete sentence, though it seems to have been done intentionally. The dangling participle leaves the readers in suspense while they wait for the solution (in v. 4) to their spiritual dilemma.</p></p>
<p id="n490023"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n490023">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> The relative pronoun <i>which</i> is feminine as is <i>sins</i>, indicating that <i>sins</i> is the antecedent.</p></p>
<p id="n490024"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n490024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “walked.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The Greek verb translated <i>lived</i> (<span class="greek">περιπατέω</span>, <span class="translit">peripateō</span>) in the NT letters refers to the conduct of one’s life, not to physical walking.</p></p>
<p id="n490025"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n490025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “Aeon.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The word translated <i>present path</i> is the same as that which has been translated [this] <i>age</i> in 1:21 (<span class="greek">αἰών</span>, <span class="translit">aiōn</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n490026"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n490026">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “[place of] authority”; see BDAG 353 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐξουσία</span> 6.</p></p>
<p id="n490027"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n490027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of” (but see the note on the word “spirit” later in this verse).</p></p>
<p id="n490028"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n490028">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>ruler of the kingdom of the air</i> is also the ruler of <i>the spirit that is now energizing the sons of disobedience</i>. Although several translations regard the <i>ruler</i> to be the same as the <i>spirit</i>, this is unlikely since the cases in Greek are different (<i>ruler</i> is accusative and <i>spirit</i> is genitive). To get around this, some have suggested that the genitive for <i>spirit</i> is a genitive of apposition. However, the semantics of the genitive of apposition are against such an interpretation (cf. <i>ExSyn</i> 100).</p></p>
<p id="n490029"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n490029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “working in.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900210"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900210">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Sons of disobedience</i> is a Semitic idiom that means “people characterized by disobedience.” However, it also contains a subtle allusion to vv. 4-10: Some of those sons of disobedience have become sons of God.</p></p>
<p id="n4900211"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900211">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Among whom</i>. The relative pronoun phrase that begins v. 3 is identical, except for gender, to the one that begins v. 2 (<span class="greek">ἐν αἵς</span> [<span class="translit">en hais</span>], <span class="greek">ἐν οἵς</span> [<span class="translit">en hois</span>]). By the structure, the author is building an argument for our hopeless condition: We lived in sin and we lived among sinful people. Our doom looked to be sealed as well in v. 2: Both the external environment (<i>kingdom of the air</i>) and our internal motivation and attitude (<i>the spirit that is now energizing</i>) were under the devil’s thumb (cf. 2 Cor 4:4).</p></p>
<p id="n4900212"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “we all.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900213"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “even.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900214"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900214">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Children of wrath</i> is a Semitic idiom which may mean either “people characterized by wrath” or “people destined for wrath.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900215"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900215">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Eph 2:1-3</i>. The translation of vv. 1-3 is very literal, even to the point of retaining the awkward syntax of the original. See note on the word <i>dead</i> in 2:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4900216"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “by grace you have been saved.” The perfect tense in Greek connotes both completed action (“you have been saved”) and continuing results (“you are saved”).</p></p>
<p id="n4900217"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “to the Aeons who are about to come.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900218"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “upon.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900219"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> See note on the same expression in v. 5.</p></p>
<p id="n4900220"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900220">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> The feminine article is found before <span class="greek">πίστεως</span> (<span class="translit">pisteōs</span>, “faith”) in the Byzantine text as well as in A <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1241 1881 <i>al</i>. Perhaps for some scribes the article was intended to imply creedal fidelity as a necessary condition of salvation (“you are saved through <i>the</i> faith”), although elsewhere in the <i>corpus Paulinum</i> the phrase <span class="greek">διὰ τῆς πίστεως</span> (<span class="translit">dia tēs pisteōs</span>) is used for the act of believing rather than the content of faith (cf. Rom 3:30, 31; Gal 3:14; Eph 3:17; Col 2:12). On the other side, strong representatives of the Alexandrian and Western texts (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D* F G P 0278 6 33 1175 1505 1739 <i>al</i> bo) lack the article. Without the article, the meaning of the text is most likely “saved through faith” as opposed to “saved through the faith.” On both internal and external grounds the anarthrous wording is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4900221"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “not as a result of.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900222"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “lest anyone should boast.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900223"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that we might walk in them” (or “by them”).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>So that we may do them</i>. Before the devil began to control our walk in sin and among sinful people, God had already planned good works for us to do.</p></p>
<p id="n4900224"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900225"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “without Christ.” Both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.” Because the context refers to ancient Israel’s messianic expectation, “Messiah” was employed in the translation at this point rather than “Christ.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900226"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “covenants of the promise.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900227"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “have come near in the blood of Christ.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on “his blood” in 1:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4900228"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who made the both one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900229"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rendered inoperative.” This is a difficult text to translate because it is not easy to find an English term which communicates well the essence of the author’s meaning, especially since legal terminology is involved. Many other translations use the term “abolish” (so NRSV, NASB, NIV), but this term implies complete destruction which is not the author’s meaning here. The verb <span class="greek">καταργέω</span> (<span class="translit">katargeō</span>) can readily have the meaning “to cause someth. to lose its power or effectiveness” (BDAG 525 s.v. 2, where this passage is listed), and this meaning fits quite naturally here within the author’s legal mindset. A proper English term which communicates this well is “nullify” since this word carries the denotation of “making something legally null and void.” This is not, however, a common English word. An alternate term like “rendered inoperative [or ineffective]” is also accurate but fairly inelegant. For this reason, the translation retains the term “nullify”; it is the best choice of the available options, despite its problems.</p></p>
<p id="n4900230"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> In this context the author is not referring to a new individual, but instead to a new corporate entity united in Christ (cf. BDAG 497 s.v. <span class="greek">καινός</span> 3.b: “All the Christians together appear as <span class="greek">κ</span>. <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> Eph 2:15”). This is clear from the comparison made between the Gentiles and Israel in the immediately preceding verses and the assertion in v. 14 that Christ “made both groups into one.” This is a different metaphor than the “new man” of Eph 4:24; in that passage the “new man” refers to the new life a believer has through a relationship to Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n4900231"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in order to create the two into one new man.” Eph 2:14-16 is one sentence in Greek. A new sentence was started here in the translation for clarity since contemporary English is less tolerant of extended sentences.</p></p>
<p id="n4900232"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by killing the hostility in himself.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900233"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for.” BDAG gives the consecutive <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) as a possible category of NT usage (BDAG 732 s.v. 5.c).</p></p>
<p id="n4900234"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having been built.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900235"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900235">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Apostles and prophets</i>. Because the prophets appear after the mention of the apostles and because they are linked together in 3:5 as recipients of revelation about the church, they are to be regarded not as Old Testament prophets, but as New Testament prophets.</p></p>
<p id="n4900236"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “while Christ Jesus himself is” or “Christ Jesus himself being.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900237"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “capstone” (NAB). The meaning of <span class="greek">ἀκρογωνιαῖος</span> (<span class="translit">akrogōniaios</span>) is greatly debated. The meaning “capstone” is proposed by J. Jeremias (<i>TDNT</i> 1:792), but the most important text for this meaning (<i>T. Sol</i>. 22:7-23:4) is late and possibly not even an appropriate parallel. The only place <span class="greek">ἀκρογωνιαῖος</span> is used in the LXX is Isa 28:16, and there it clearly refers to a cornerstone that is part of a foundation. Furthermore, the imagery in this context has the building growing off the cornerstone upward, whereas if Christ were the capstone, he would not assume his position until the building was finished, which vv. 21-22 argue against.</p></p>
<p id="n4900238"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in whom” (v. 21 is a relative clause, subordinate to v. 20).</p></p>
<p id="n4900239"><a href="file1148.xhtml#n4900239">39</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although several significant witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> A C P 6 81 326 1739<sup>c</sup> 1881) have <span class="greek">πᾶσα ἡ οἰκοδομή</span> (<span class="translit">pasa hē oikodomē</span>), instead of <span class="greek">πᾶσα οἰκοδομή</span> (the reading of <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1505 1739* <span class="apparatus">M</span>), the article is almost surely a scribal addition intended to clarify the meaning of the text, for with the article the meaning is unambiguously “the whole building.”</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “every building.” Although “every building” is a more natural translation of the Greek, it does not fit as naturally into the context, which (with its emphasis on corporate unity) seems to stress the idea of one building.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
