<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Genealogy of Jesus Christ</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> This is the record of the genealogy<sup><a id="n400011" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n400011">1</a></sup> of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:2</span> Abraham was the father<sup><a id="n400012" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n400012">2</a></sup> of Isaac, Isaac the father of Jacob, Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers, <span class="verse">1:3</span> Judah the father of Perez and Zerah (by Tamar), Perez the father of Hezron, Hezron the father of Ram, <span class="verse">1:4</span> Ram the father of Amminadab, Amminadab the father of Nahshon, Nahshon the father of Salmon, <span class="verse">1:5</span> Salmon the father of Boaz (by Rahab), Boaz the father of Obed (by Ruth), Obed the father of Jesse, <span class="verse">1:6</span> and Jesse the father of David the king.</p>
<p class="bodytext">David was the father of Solomon (by the wife of Uriah<sup><a id="n400013" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n400013">3</a></sup>), <span class="verse">1:7</span> Solomon the father of Rehoboam, Rehoboam the father of Abijah, Abijah the father of Asa,<sup><a id="n400014" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n400014">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:8</span> Asa the father of Jehoshaphat, Jehoshaphat the father of Joram, Joram the father of Uzziah, <span class="verse">1:9</span> Uzziah the father of Jotham, Jotham the father of Ahaz, Ahaz the father of Hezekiah, <span class="verse">1:10</span> Hezekiah the father of Manasseh, Manasseh the father of Amon,<sup><a id="n400015" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n400015">5</a></sup> Amon the father of Josiah, <span class="verse">1:11</span> and Josiah<sup><a id="n400016" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n400016">6</a></sup> the father of Jeconiah and his brothers, at the time of the deportation to Babylon. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:12</span> After<sup><a id="n400017" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n400017">7</a></sup> the deportation to Babylon, Jeconiah became the father of Shealtiel,<sup><a id="n400018" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n400018">8</a></sup> Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel, <span class="verse">1:13</span> Zerubbabel the father of Abiud, Abiud the father of Eliakim, Eliakim the father of Azor, <span class="verse">1:14</span> Azor the father of Zadok, Zadok the father of Achim, Achim the father of Eliud, <span class="verse">1:15</span> Eliud the father of Eleazar, Eleazar the father of Matthan, Matthan the father of Jacob, <span class="verse">1:16</span> and Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, by whom<sup><a id="n400019" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n400019">9</a></sup> Jesus was born, who is called Christ.<sup><a id="n4000110" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000110">10</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:17</span> So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations, and from David to the deportation to Babylon, fourteen generations, and from the deportation to Babylon to Christ,<sup><a id="n4000111" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000111">11</a></sup> fourteen generations. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Birth of Jesus Christ</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:18</span> Now the birth of Jesus Christ happened this way. While his mother Mary was engaged to Joseph, but before they came together,<sup><a id="n4000112" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000112">12</a></sup> she was found to be pregnant through the Holy Spirit. <span class="verse">1:19</span> Because Joseph, her husband to be,<sup><a id="n4000113" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000113">13</a></sup> was a righteous man, and because he did not want to disgrace her, he intended to divorce her<sup><a id="n4000114" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000114">14</a></sup> privately. <span class="verse">1:20</span> When he had contemplated this, an<sup><a id="n4000115" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000115">15</a></sup> angel of the Lord<sup><a id="n4000116" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000116">16</a></sup> appeared to him in a dream and said, “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife, because the child conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit. <span class="verse">1:21</span> She will give birth to a son and you will name him<sup><a id="n4000117" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000117">17</a></sup> Jesus,<sup><a id="n4000118" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000118">18</a></sup> because he will save his people from their sins.” <span class="verse">1:22</span> This all happened so that what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet would be fulfilled: <span class="verse">1:23</span> “<i><b>Look! The virgin will conceive and give birth to a son, and</b> they <b>will name him</b></i><sup><a id="n4000119" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000119">19</a></sup> <b><i>Emmanuel</i></b>,”<sup><a id="n4000120" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000120">20</a></sup> which means<sup><a id="n4000121" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000121">21</a></sup> “<b><i>God with us</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4000122" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000122">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:24</span> When Joseph awoke from sleep he did what the angel of the Lord<sup><a id="n4000123" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000123">23</a></sup> told him. He took his wife, <span class="verse">1:25</span> but did not have marital relations<sup><a id="n4000124" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000124">24</a></sup> with her until she gave birth to a son, whom he named<sup><a id="n4000125" href="file970_notes.xhtml#n4000125">25</a></sup> Jesus. </p>

</body>
</html>