<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Thessalonians 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Thessalonians<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Request for Prayer</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Finally, pray for us, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n530031" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n530031">1</a></sup> that the Lord’s message<sup><a id="n530032" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n530032">2</a></sup> may spread quickly and be honored<sup><a id="n530033" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n530033">3</a></sup> as in fact it was among you, <span class="verse">3:2</span> and that we may be delivered from perverse and evil people. For not all have faith. <span class="verse">3:3</span> But the Lord is faithful, and he<sup><a id="n530034" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n530034">4</a></sup> will strengthen you and protect you from the evil one. <span class="verse">3:4</span> And we are confident about you in the Lord that you are both doing—and will do—what we are commanding. <span class="verse">3:5</span> Now may the Lord direct your hearts toward the love of God<sup><a id="n530035" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n530035">5</a></sup> and the endurance of Christ.<sup><a id="n530036" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n530036">6</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Response to the Undisciplined</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:6</span> But we command you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n530037" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n530037">7</a></sup> in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to keep away from any brother who lives an undisciplined<sup><a id="n530038" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n530038">8</a></sup> life<sup><a id="n530039" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n530039">9</a></sup> and not according to the tradition they<sup><a id="n5300310" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300310">10</a></sup> received from us. <span class="verse">3:7</span> For you know yourselves how you must imitate us, because we did not behave without discipline<sup><a id="n5300311" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300311">11</a></sup> among you, <span class="verse">3:8</span> and we did not eat anyone’s food without paying.<sup><a id="n5300312" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300312">12</a></sup> Instead, in toil and drudgery we worked<sup><a id="n5300313" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300313">13</a></sup> night and day in order not to burden any of you. <span class="verse">3:9</span> It was not because we do not have that right, but to give ourselves as an example for you to imitate.<sup><a id="n5300314" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300314">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:10</span> For even when we were with you, we used to give you this command: “If anyone is not willing to work, neither should he eat.” <span class="verse">3:11</span> For we hear that some among you are living an undisciplined life,<sup><a id="n5300315" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300315">15</a></sup> not doing their own work but meddling in the work of others.<sup><a id="n5300316" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300316">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:12</span> Now such people we command and urge in the Lord Jesus Christ to work quietly and so provide their own food to eat.<sup><a id="n5300317" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300317">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:13</span> But you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5300318" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300318">18</a></sup> do not grow weary in doing what is right. <span class="verse">3:14</span> But if anyone does not obey our message through this letter, take note of him and do not associate closely with him, so that he may be ashamed. <span class="verse">3:15</span> Yet do not regard him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.<sup><a id="n5300319" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300319">19</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Conclusion</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:16</span> Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times and in every way. The Lord be with you all. <span class="verse">3:17</span> I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand, which is how I write in every letter.<sup><a id="n5300320" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300320">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:18</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.<sup><a id="n5300321" href="file1172_notes.xhtml#n5300321">21</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>