<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Revelation 20</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Revelation<br />Chapter 20</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Thousand Year Reign</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:1</span> Then<sup><a id="n660201" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n660201">1</a></sup> I saw an angel descending from heaven, holding<sup><a id="n660202" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n660202">2</a></sup> in his hand the key to the abyss and a huge chain. <span class="verse">20:2</span> He<sup><a id="n660203" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n660203">3</a></sup> seized the dragon—the ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan—and tied him up for a thousand years. <span class="verse">20:3</span> The angel<sup><a id="n660204" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n660204">4</a></sup> then<sup><a id="n660205" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n660205">5</a></sup> threw him into the abyss and locked<sup><a id="n660206" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n660206">6</a></sup> and sealed it so that he could not deceive the nations until the one thousand years were finished. (After these things he must be released for a brief period of time.) </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:4</span> Then<sup><a id="n660207" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n660207">7</a></sup> I saw thrones and seated on them were those who had been given authority to judge.<sup><a id="n660208" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n660208">8</a></sup> I also saw the souls of those who had been beheaded because of the testimony about Jesus and because of the word of God. These<sup><a id="n660209" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n660209">9</a></sup> had not worshiped the beast or his image and had refused to receive his mark on their forehead or hand. They<sup><a id="n6602010" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602010">10</a></sup> came to life<sup><a id="n6602011" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602011">11</a></sup> and reigned with Christ for a thousand years. <span class="verse">20:5</span> (The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were finished.)<sup><a id="n6602012" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602012">12</a></sup> This is the first resurrection. <span class="verse">20:6</span> Blessed and holy is the one who takes part<sup><a id="n6602013" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602013">13</a></sup> in the first resurrection. The second death has no power over them,<sup><a id="n6602014" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602014">14</a></sup> but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and they will reign with him for a thousand years. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Satan’s Final Defeat</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:7</span> Now<sup><a id="n6602015" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602015">15</a></sup> when the thousand years are finished, Satan will be released from his prison <span class="verse">20:8</span> and will go out to deceive<sup><a id="n6602016" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602016">16</a></sup> the nations at the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog,<sup><a id="n6602017" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602017">17</a></sup> to bring them together for the battle. They are as numerous as the grains of sand in the sea.<sup><a id="n6602018" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602018">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:9</span> They<sup><a id="n6602019" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602019">19</a></sup> went up<sup><a id="n6602020" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602020">20</a></sup> on the broad plain of the earth<sup><a id="n6602021" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602021">21</a></sup> and encircled<sup><a id="n6602022" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602022">22</a></sup> the camp<sup><a id="n6602023" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602023">23</a></sup> of the saints and the beloved city, but<sup><a id="n6602024" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602024">24</a></sup> fire came down from heaven and devoured them completely.<sup><a id="n6602025" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602025">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:10</span> And the devil who deceived<sup><a id="n6602026" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602026">26</a></sup> them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur,<sup><a id="n6602027" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602027">27</a></sup> where the beast and the false prophet are<sup><a id="n6602028" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602028">28</a></sup> too, and they will be tormented there day and night forever and ever. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Great White Throne</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:11</span> Then<sup><a id="n6602029" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602029">29</a></sup> I saw a large<sup><a id="n6602030" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602030">30</a></sup> white throne and the one who was seated on it; the earth and the heaven<sup><a id="n6602031" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602031">31</a></sup> fled<sup><a id="n6602032" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602032">32</a></sup> from his presence, and no place was found for them. <span class="verse">20:12</span> And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne. Then<sup><a id="n6602033" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602033">33</a></sup> books were opened, and another book was opened—the book of life.<sup><a id="n6602034" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602034">34</a></sup> So<sup><a id="n6602035" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602035">35</a></sup> the dead were judged by what was written in the books, according to their deeds.<sup><a id="n6602036" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602036">36</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:13</span> The<sup><a id="n6602037" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602037">37</a></sup> sea gave up the dead that were in it, and Death<sup><a id="n6602038" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602038">38</a></sup> and Hades gave up the dead that were in them, and each one was judged according to his deeds. <span class="verse">20:14</span> Then<sup><a id="n6602039" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602039">39</a></sup> Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death—the lake of fire. <span class="verse">20:15</span> If<sup><a id="n6602040" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602040">40</a></sup> anyone’s name<sup><a id="n6602041" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602041">41</a></sup> was not found written in the book of life, that person<sup><a id="n6602042" href="file1253_notes.xhtml#n6602042">42</a></sup> was thrown into the lake of fire. </p>

</body>
</html>