<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Do Not Judge </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> “Do not judge so that you will not be judged.<sup><a id="n400071" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n400071">1</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:2</span> For by the standard you judge you will be judged, and the measure you use will be the measure you receive.<sup><a id="n400072" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n400072">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:3</span> Why<sup><a id="n400073" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n400073">3</a></sup> do you see the speck<sup><a id="n400074" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n400074">4</a></sup> in your brother’s eye, but fail to see<sup><a id="n400075" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n400075">5</a></sup> the beam of wood<sup><a id="n400076" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n400076">6</a></sup> in your own? <span class="verse">7:4</span> Or how can you say<sup><a id="n400077" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n400077">7</a></sup> to your brother, ‘Let me remove the speck from your eye,’ while there is a beam in your own? <span class="verse">7:5</span> You hypocrite! First remove the beam from your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye. <span class="verse">7:6</span> Do not give what is holy to dogs or throw your pearls before pigs; otherwise they will trample them under their feet and turn around and tear you to pieces.<sup><a id="n400078" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n400078">8</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ask, Seek, Knock </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:7</span> “Ask<sup><a id="n400079" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n400079">9</a></sup> and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door<sup><a id="n4000710" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000710">10</a></sup> will be opened for you. <span class="verse">7:8</span> For everyone who asks<sup><a id="n4000711" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000711">11</a></sup> receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened. <span class="verse">7:9</span> Is<sup><a id="n4000712" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000712">12</a></sup> there anyone among you who, if his son asks for bread, will give him a stone? <span class="verse">7:10</span> Or if he asks for a fish, will give him a snake?<sup><a id="n4000713" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000713">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:11</span> If you then, although you are evil,<sup><a id="n4000714" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000714">14</a></sup> know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts<sup><a id="n4000715" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000715">15</a></sup> to those who ask him! <span class="verse">7:12</span> In<sup><a id="n4000716" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000716">16</a></sup> everything, treat others as you would want them<sup><a id="n4000717" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000717">17</a></sup> to treat you,<sup><a id="n4000718" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000718">18</a></sup> for this fulfills<sup><a id="n4000719" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000719">19</a></sup> the law and the prophets. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Narrow Gate </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:13</span> “Enter<sup><a id="n4000720" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000720">20</a></sup> through the narrow gate, because the gate is wide and the way is spacious that leads to destruction, and there are many who enter through it. <span class="verse">7:14</span> How<sup><a id="n4000721" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000721">21</a></sup> narrow is the gate and difficult the way that leads to life,<sup><a id="n4000722" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000722">22</a></sup> and there are few who find it! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Tree and Its Fruit </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:15</span> “Watch out for false prophets,<sup><a id="n4000723" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000723">23</a></sup> who come to you in sheep’s clothing but inwardly are voracious wolves.<sup><a id="n4000724" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000724">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:16</span> You will recognize them by their fruit. Grapes are not gathered<sup><a id="n4000725" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000725">25</a></sup> from thorns or figs from thistles, are they?<sup><a id="n4000726" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000726">26</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:17</span> In the same way, every good tree bears good fruit, but the bad<sup><a id="n4000727" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000727">27</a></sup> tree bears bad fruit. <span class="verse">7:18</span> A good tree is not able to bear bad fruit, nor a bad tree to bear good fruit. <span class="verse">7:19</span> Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. <span class="verse">7:20</span> So then, you will recognize them by their fruit. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judgment of Pretenders </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:21</span> “Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’<sup><a id="n4000728" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000728">28</a></sup> will enter into the kingdom of heaven—only the one who does the will of my Father in heaven. <span class="verse">7:22</span> On that day, many will say to me, ‘Lord, Lord, didn’t we prophesy in your name, and cast out demons in your name, and do many powerful deeds in your name?’<sup><a id="n4000729" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000729">29</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:23</span> Then I will declare to them, ‘I never knew you. Go away from me, you lawbreakers!’<sup><a id="n4000730" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000730">30</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Hearing and Doing</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:24</span> “Everyone<sup><a id="n4000731" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000731">31</a></sup> who hears these words of mine and does them is like<sup><a id="n4000732" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000732">32</a></sup> a wise man<sup><a id="n4000733" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000733">33</a></sup> who built his house on rock. <span class="verse">7:25</span> The rain fell, the flood<sup><a id="n4000734" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000734">34</a></sup> came, and the winds beat against that house, but it did not collapse because its foundation had been laid on rock. <span class="verse">7:26</span> Everyone who hears these words of mine and does not do them is like a foolish man who built his house on sand. <span class="verse">7:27</span> The rain fell, the flood came, and the winds beat against that house, and it collapsed—it was utterly destroyed!”<sup><a id="n4000735" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000735">35</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:28</span> When<sup><a id="n4000736" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000736">36</a></sup> Jesus finished saying these things, the crowds were amazed by his teaching, <span class="verse">7:29</span> because he taught them like one who had authority,<sup><a id="n4000737" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000737">37</a></sup> not like their experts in the law.<sup><a id="n4000738" href="file976_notes.xhtml#n4000738">38</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>