<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for James 3</h2>
<p id="n590031"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n590031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n590032"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n590032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will receive a greater judgment.”</p></p>
<p id="n590033"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n590033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “fail.”</p></p>
<p id="n590034"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n590034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “fail.”</p></p>
<p id="n590035"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n590035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in speech.”</p></p>
<p id="n590036"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n590036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word for “man” or “individual” is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which often means “male” or “man (as opposed to woman).” But it sometimes is used generically to mean “anyone,” “a person,” as here (cf. BDAG 79 s.v. 2).</p></p>
<p id="n590037"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n590037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “their entire body.”</p></p>
<p id="n590038"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n590038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a small member.”</p></p>
<p id="n590039"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n590039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “boasts of great things.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900310"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900311"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “makes itself,” “is made.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900312"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5900313"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900313">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> The word translated <i>hell</i> is “Gehenna” (<span class="greek">γέεννα</span>, <span class="translit">geenna</span>), a Greek transliteration of the Hebrew words <i>ge hinnom</i> (“Valley of Hinnom”). This was the valley along the south side of Jerusalem. In OT times it was used for human sacrifices to the pagan god Molech (cf. Jer 7:31; 19:5-6; 32:35), and it came to be used as a place where human excrement and rubbish were disposed of and burned. In the intertestamental period, it came to be used symbolically as the place of divine punishment (cf. <i>1 En</i>. 27:2; 90:26; <i>4 Ezra</i> 7:36).</p></p>
<p id="n5900314"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> (plurals), “every kind of animals and birds, of reptiles and sea creatures.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900315"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the human species.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900316"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900316">16</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (C <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1611 1739<sup>c</sup> 1244 <span class="apparatus">M</span> as well as a few versions and fathers) read “uncontrollable” (<span class="greek">ἀκατασχετόν</span>, <span class="translit">akatascheton</span>), while most of the more significant witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B K P 1175 1243 1735 1739* latt co) have “restless” (<span class="greek">ἀκατάστατον</span>, <span class="translit">akatastaton</span>). Externally, the latter reading should be preferred. Internally, however, things get a bit more complex. The notion of being uncontrollable is well suited to the context, especially as a counterbalance to v. 8a, though for this very reason scribes may have been tempted to replace <span class="greek">ἀκατάστατον</span> with <span class="greek">ἀκατασχετόν</span>. In a semantically parallel early Christian text, <span class="greek">ἀκατάστατος</span> (<span class="translit">akatastatos</span>) was considered strong enough of a term to denounce slander as “a restless demon” (Herm. 27:3). On the other hand, <span class="greek">ἀκατάστατον</span> may have been substituted for <span class="greek">ἀκατασχετόν</span> by way of assimilation to 1:8 (especially since both words were relatively rare, scribes may have replaced the less familiar with one that was already used in this letter). On internal evidence, it is difficult to decide, though <span class="greek">ἀκατασχετόν</span> is slightly preferred. However, in light of the strong support for <span class="greek">ἀκατάστατον</span>, and the less-than-decisive internal evidence, <span class="greek">ἀκατάστατον</span> is deemed more likely to be the initial reading.</p></p>
<p id="n5900317"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900317">17</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">M</span>), along with several versional witnesses, have <span class="greek">θεόν</span> (<span class="translit">theon</span>, “God”) here instead of <span class="greek">κύριον</span> (<span class="translit">kurion</span>, “Lord”). Such is a predictable variant since nowhere else in the NT is God described as “<i>Lord</i> and Father,” but he is called “God and Father” on several occasions. Further, the reading <span class="greek">κύριον</span> is well supported by early and diversified witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>20</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 81 945 1241 1739), rendering it as the overwhelmingly preferred reading.</p></p>
<p id="n5900318"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men”; but here <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπους</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpous</span>) has generic force, referring to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n5900319"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5900320"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5900321"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “works in the gentleness of wisdom.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900322"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “This.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900323"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “come down”; “descend.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900324"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “soulish,” which describes life apart from God, characteristic of earthly human life as opposed to what is spiritual. Cf. 1 Cor 2:14; 15:44-46; Jude 19.</p></p>
<p id="n5900325"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “willing to yield,” “open to persuasion.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900326"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fruits.” The plural Greek term <span class="greek">καρπούς</span> has been translated with the collective singular “fruit.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900327"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sincere.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900328"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900328">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the fruit of righteousness,” meaning righteous living as a fruit, as the thing produced.</p></p>
<p id="n5900329"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is sown.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900330"><a href="file1208.xhtml#n5900330">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for,” or possibly “by.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
