<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Colossians 4</h2>
<p id="n5100320"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The article <span class="greek">τοῖς</span> (<span class="translit">tois</span>) with <span class="greek">ἀνδράσιν</span> (<span class="translit">andrasin</span>, “husbands”) has been translated as a possessive pronoun (“your”); see <i>ExSyn</i> 215. </p></p>
<p id="n5100321"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “Parents.” The plural <span class="greek">οἱ πατέρες</span> (<span class="translit">hoi pateres</span>, “fathers”) can be used to refer to both the male and female parent (BDAG 786 s.v. <span class="greek">πατήρ</span> 1.a).</p></p>
<p id="n5100322"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “do not cause your children to become resentful” (L&amp;N 88.168). BDAG 391 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐρεθίζω</span> states, “to cause someone to react in a way that suggests acceptance of a challenge, <i>arouse, provoke</i> mostly in bad sense <i>irritate, embitter</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100323"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this word here and in 4:1, see the note on “fellow slave” in 1:7.</p></p>
<p id="n5100324"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The prepositional phrase <span class="greek">κατὰ σάρκα</span> (<span class="translit">kata sarka</span>) does not necessarily qualify the masters as earthly or human (as opposed to the Master in heaven, the Lord), but could also refer to the sphere in which “the service-relation holds true.” See BDAG 577 s.v. <span class="greek">κύριος</span> 1.b. </p></p>
<p id="n5100325"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> The present progressive “are doing” was used in the translation of <span class="greek">ποιῆτε</span> (<span class="translit">poiēte</span>) to bring out the idea that Paul is probably referring to what they already do for work. </p></p>
<p id="n5100326"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the soul.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100327"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men”; here <span class="greek">ἀνθρώποις</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpois</span>) is used in a generic sense and refers to people in general.</p></p>
<p id="n5100328"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100328">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The article <span class="greek">τῆς</span> (<span class="translit">tēs</span>) has been translated as a possessive pronoun, “your” (<i>ExSyn</i> 215). It may also be functioning to indicate a well-known concept (inheritance as eternal life). See BDAG 548 s.v. <span class="greek">κληρονομία</span> 3: “common in Christian usage (corresp. to the LXX) (the possession of) <i>transcendent salvation</i> (as the inheritance of God’s children).”</p></p>
<p id="n5100329"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive <span class="greek">τῆς κληρονομίας</span> (<span class="translit">tēs klēronomias</span>) is a genitive of apposition: The reward consists of the inheritance.</p></p>
<p id="n5100330"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100330">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The form of the term <span class="greek">δουλεύετε</span> (<span class="translit">douleuete</span>) is ambiguous; it can be read as either indicative or imperative. In favor of the indicative: (1) it seems to explain better the first part of v. 24, esp. “from the Lord” which would then read as: “because you know that you will receive your inheritance from the Lord as a reward <i>for</i> it is the Lord you are serving.” The “for” is supplied to make the relation explicit (it is actually added in many <span class="smcaps">mss</span>—D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 <span class="apparatus">M</span>—but the best ms evidence is against its inclusion). (2) With the imperative, one might expect <span class="greek">ὡς τῷ κυρίῳ</span> (<span class="translit">hōs tō kuriō</span>), as for example in Eph 6:7. In favor of the imperative: (1) an imperative resumes the <span class="greek">ἐργάζεσθε</span> (<span class="translit">ergazesthe</span>) in v. 23a and forms a chiasm with it; (2) an imperative makes more sense of the <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) in v. 25a; (3) an imperative relates equally well to the preceding statement; (4) a parallel can be found in Rom 12:11 which uses an imperatival participle <span class="greek">δουλεύοντες</span> (<span class="translit">douleuontes</span>) with the dative <span class="greek">τῷ κυρίῳ</span>. For an elaboration of these points see M. J. Harris, <i>Colossians and Philemon</i> (EGGNT), 185-86. </p></p>
<p id="n5100331"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100331">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that which he did wrong.”</p><p><b>sn</b> It is a common theme in biblical thought that punishment for sin involves being fully given over to its consequences (cf. Rom 1), and this is also true of believers. Here Paul’s implication is that believers who sin and disobey the Lord whom they serve will receive the consequences of their actions, which is a fitting discipline.</p></p>
<p id="n5100332"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100332">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word used here is <span class="greek">προσωπολημψία</span> (<span class="translit">prosōpolēmpsia</span>) and is usually translated “partiality.” It is used to describe unjust or unrighteous favoritism (Rom 2:11, Eph 6:9, Jas 2:1). When it comes to disciplining his children for their sins, God will treat all equally with no partiality. </p></p>
<p id="n510041"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n510041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though <span class="greek">προσευχόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">proseuchomenoi</span>) is an adverbial participle related to the previous imperative, <span class="greek">προσκαρτερεῖτε</span> (<span class="translit">proskartereite</span>), it is here translated as an independent clause due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n510042"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n510042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clause has been rendered as substantival here, indicating the content of the prayer rather than the purpose for it. These two ideas are very similar and difficult to differentiate in this passage, but the conjunction <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> following a verb of praying is generally regarded as giving the content of the prayer.</p></p>
<p id="n510043"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n510043">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that God may open for us a door of the word to speak the mystery of Christ.” The construction in Greek is somewhat awkward in this clause. The translation attempts to simplify this structure somewhat and yet communicate exactly what Paul is asking for.</p></p>
<p id="n510044"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n510044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “so that we may speak.”</p></p>
<p id="n510045"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n510045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in prison.”</p></p>
<p id="n510046"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n510046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase begins with the <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clause and is subordinate to the imperative <span class="greek">προσκαρτερεῖτε</span> (<span class="translit">proskartereite</span>) in v. 2. The reference to the idea that Paul must make it known indicates that this clause is probably best viewed as purpose and not content, like the <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> of v. 3. It is the second purpose stated in the context; the first is expressed through the infinitive <span class="greek">λαλῆσαι</span> (<span class="translit">lalēsai</span>) in v. 3. The term “pray” at the beginning of the sentence is intended to pick up the imperative of v. 3.</p></p>
<p id="n510047"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n510047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “walk.” The verb <span class="greek">περιπατέω</span> (<span class="translit">peripateō</span>) is a common NT idiom for one’s lifestyle, behavior, or manner of conduct (L&amp;N 41.11).</p></p>
<p id="n510048"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n510048">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on “fellow slave” in 1:7.</p></p>
<p id="n510049"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n510049">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all things according to me.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100410"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the things concerning us.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100411"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek sentence continues v. 9 with the phrase “with Onesimus,” but this is awkward in English, so the verb “I sent” was inserted and a new sentence started at the beginning of v. 9 in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n5100412"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is of you.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100413"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will make known to you.” This has been simplified in the translation to “will tell.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100414"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those of the circumcision.” The verse as a whole is difficult to translate because it is unclear whether Paul is saying (1) that the only people working with him are Jewish converts at the time the letter is being written or previously, or (2) that Aristarchus, Mark, and Jesus Justus were the only Jewish Christians who ever worked with him. Verses 12-14 appear to indicate that Luke and Demas, who were Gentiles, were also working currently with Paul. This is the view adopted in the translation. See M. J. Harris, <i>Colossians and Philemon</i> (EGGNT), 207-8.</p></p>
<p id="n5100415"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on “fellow slave” in 1:7.</p></p>
<p id="n5100416"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100416">16</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Strong Alexandrian testimony, along with some other witnesses, suggests that <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsou</span>, “Jesus”) follows <span class="greek">Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">Christou</span>, “Christ”; so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C I L 0278 33 81 365 629 1175 2464 <i>al</i> lat), but the evidence for the shorter reading is diverse (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 1505 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it sy Ambst Hier), cutting across all major textual groups. There can be little motivation for omitting the name of Jesus; hence, the shorter reading is judged to be that of the initial text. NA<sup>28</sup> has <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> in brackets, indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n5100417"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “filled.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100418"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “pain.” This word appears only three times in the NT outside of this verse (Rev 16:10, 11; 21:4) where the translation “pain” makes sense. For the present verse it has been translated “worked hard.” See BDAG 852 s.v. <span class="greek">πόνος</span> 1.</p></p>
<p id="n5100419"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100419">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Demas</i> is most likely the same individual mentioned in Phlm 24 and 2 Tim 4:10. Apparently, he later on abandoned the faith because of his love of the world.</p></p>
<p id="n5100420"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5100421"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100421">21</a> <p><b>tc</b> If the name Nympha is accented with a circumflex on the ultima (<span class="greek">Νυμφᾶν</span>, <span class="translit">Numphan</span>), then it refers to a man; if it receives an acute accent on the penult (<span class="greek">Νύμφαν</span>), the reference is to a woman. Scribes that considered Nympha to be a man’s name had the corresponding masculine pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> here (<span class="translit">autou</span>, “his”; so D [F G] <span class="greek">Ψ</span> [1505] <span class="apparatus">M</span>), while those who saw Nympha as a woman read the feminine <span class="greek">αὐτῆς</span> here (<span class="translit">autēs</span>, “her”; B 0278 6 1739<sup>[</sup>*<sup>]</sup> 1881 sa). Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C P 075 33 81 104 326 1175 2464 bo) have <span class="greek">αὐτῶν</span> (<span class="translit">autōn</span>, “their”), perhaps because of indecisiveness on the gender of Nympha, perhaps because they included <span class="greek">ἀδελφούς</span> (<span class="translit">adelphous</span>, here translated “brothers and sisters”) as part of the referent. The harder reading is certainly <span class="greek">αὐτῆς</span>, and thus Nympha should be considered a woman. </p></p>
<p id="n5100422"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the church in her house.” The meaning is that Paul sends greetings to the church that meets at Nympha’s house.</p></p>
<p id="n5100423"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “when.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100424"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The construction beginning with the imperative <span class="greek">ποιήσατε ἵνα</span>…<span class="greek">ἀναγνωσθῇ</span> (<span class="translit">poiēsate hina</span>…<span class="translit">anagnōsthē</span>) should be translated as “have it read” where the conjunction <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> functions to mark off its clause as the direct object of the imperative <span class="greek">ποιήσατε</span>. The content of the clause (“reading the letter”) is what Paul commands with the imperative <span class="greek">ποιήσατε</span>. Thus the translation “have it read” has been used here.</p></p>
<p id="n5100425"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100425">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> This letter is otherwise unknown, but some have suggested that it is the letter known today as Ephesians.</p></p>
<p id="n5100426"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the greeting by my hand, of Paul.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100427"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “my imprisonment.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100428"><a href="file1162.xhtml#n5100428">28</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including a few important ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 0278 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy), conclude this letter with <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”). Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Further, the external evidence for the omission is quite compelling (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B C F G 048 6 33 81 1739* 1881 sa). The strongly preferred reading is therefore the omission of <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
