<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Corinthians 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Corinthians<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Perseverance in Ministry</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Therefore, since we have this ministry, just as God has shown us mercy,<sup><a id="n470041" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n470041">1</a></sup> we do not become discouraged.<sup><a id="n470042" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n470042">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:2</span> But we have rejected<sup><a id="n470043" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n470043">3</a></sup> shameful hidden deeds,<sup><a id="n470044" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n470044">4</a></sup> not behaving<sup><a id="n470045" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n470045">5</a></sup> with deceptiveness<sup><a id="n470046" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n470046">6</a></sup> or distorting the word of God, but by open proclamation of the truth we commend ourselves to everyone’s conscience before God. <span class="verse">4:3</span> But even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled only to those who are perishing, <span class="verse">4:4</span> among whom the god of this age has blinded the minds of those who do not believe<sup><a id="n470047" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n470047">7</a></sup> so they would not see the light of the glorious gospel<sup><a id="n470048" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n470048">8</a></sup> of Christ,<sup><a id="n470049" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n470049">9</a></sup> who is the image of God. <span class="verse">4:5</span> For we do not proclaim<sup><a id="n4700410" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700410">10</a></sup> ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves as your slaves<sup><a id="n4700411" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700411">11</a></sup> for Jesus’ sake. <span class="verse">4:6</span> For God, who said “<i>Let light shine out of darkness</i>,”<sup><a id="n4700412" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700412">12</a></sup> is the one who shined in our hearts to give us the light of the glorious knowledge<sup><a id="n4700413" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700413">13</a></sup> of God in the face of Christ.<sup><a id="n4700414" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700414">14</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">An Eternal Weight of Glory</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:7</span> But we have this treasure in clay jars, so that the extraordinary power<sup><a id="n4700415" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700415">15</a></sup> belongs to God and does not come from us. <span class="verse">4:8</span> We are experiencing trouble on every side,<sup><a id="n4700416" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700416">16</a></sup> but are not crushed; we are perplexed,<sup><a id="n4700417" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700417">17</a></sup> but not driven to despair; <span class="verse">4:9</span> we are persecuted, but not abandoned;<sup><a id="n4700418" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700418">18</a></sup> we are knocked down,<sup><a id="n4700419" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700419">19</a></sup> but not destroyed, <span class="verse">4:10</span> always carrying around in our body the death of Jesus,<sup><a id="n4700420" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700420">20</a></sup> so that the life of Jesus may also be made visible<sup><a id="n4700421" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700421">21</a></sup> in our body. <span class="verse">4:11</span> For we who are alive are constantly being handed over to death for Jesus’ sake, so that the life of Jesus may also be made visible<sup><a id="n4700422" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700422">22</a></sup> in our mortal body.<sup><a id="n4700423" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700423">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:12</span> As a result,<sup><a id="n4700424" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700424">24</a></sup> death is at work in us, but life is at work in you.<sup><a id="n4700425" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700425">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:13</span> But since we have the same spirit of faith as that shown in<sup><a id="n4700426" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700426">26</a></sup> what has been written, “<b><i>I believed; therefore I spoke</i></b>,”<sup><a id="n4700427" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700427">27</a></sup> we also believe, therefore we also speak. <span class="verse">4:14</span> We do so<sup><a id="n4700428" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700428">28</a></sup> because we know that the one who raised up Jesus<sup><a id="n4700429" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700429">29</a></sup> will also raise us up with Jesus and will bring us with you into his presence. <span class="verse">4:15</span> For all these things are for your sake, so that the grace that is including<sup><a id="n4700430" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700430">30</a></sup> more and more people may cause thanksgiving to increase<sup><a id="n4700431" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700431">31</a></sup> to the glory of God. <span class="verse">4:16</span> Therefore we do not despair,<sup><a id="n4700432" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700432">32</a></sup> but even if our physical body<sup><a id="n4700433" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700433">33</a></sup> is wearing away, our inner person<sup><a id="n4700434" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700434">34</a></sup> is being renewed day by day. <span class="verse">4:17</span> For our momentary, light suffering<sup><a id="n4700435" href="file1129_notes.xhtml#n4700435">35</a></sup> is producing for us an eternal weight of glory far beyond all comparison <span class="verse">4:18</span> because we are not looking at what can be seen but at what cannot be seen. For what can be seen is temporary, but what cannot be seen is eternal. </p>

</body>
</html>