<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 21</h2>
<p id="n440211"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n440211">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened that when.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Since the action described by the participle <span class="greek">ἀποσπασθέντας</span> (<span class="translit">apospasthentas</span>, “tearing ourselves away”) is prior to the departure of the ship, it has been translated as antecedent action (“after”).</p></p>
<p id="n440212"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n440212">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> This marks the beginning of one of the “<i>we</i>” sections in Acts (16:10-17; 20:5-15; 21:1-18; 27:1-28:16). These have been traditionally understood to mean that the author was in the company of Paul for this part of the journey.</p></p>
<p id="n440213"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n440213">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 120 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀποσπάω</span> 2.b has “pass. in mid. sense <span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἀπό τινος</span> <i>tear oneself away</i> Ac 21:1”; LSJ 218 gives several illustrations of this verb meaning “<i>to tear</i> or <i>drag away</i> from.”</p></p>
<p id="n440214"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n440214">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n440215"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n440215">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 406 s.v. <span class="greek">εὐθυδρομέω</span> has “of a ship <i>run a straight course</i>”; L&amp;N 54.3 has “to sail a straight course, sail straight to.”</p></p>
<p id="n440216"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n440216">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cos</i> was an island in the Aegean Sea.</p></p>
<p id="n440217"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n440217">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Rhodes</i> was an island off the southwestern coast of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n440218"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n440218">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Patara</i> was a city in Lycia on the southwestern coast of Asia Minor. The entire journey was about 185 mi (295 km).</p></p>
<p id="n440219"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n440219">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and finding.” The participle <span class="greek">εὑρόντες</span> (<span class="translit">heurontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402110"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402110">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Phoenicia</i> was the name of an area along the Mediterranean coast north of Palestine.</p></p>
<p id="n4402111"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going aboard, we put out to sea.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιβάντες</span> (<span class="translit">epibantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402112"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402113"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402113">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cyprus</i> is a large island in the Mediterranean off the south coast of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4402114"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402114">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>left it behind on our port side</i> here means “sailed past to the south of it” since the ship was sailing east.</p></p>
<p id="n4402115"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 531 s.v. <span class="greek">κατέρχομαι</span> 2 states, “<i>arrive, put in,</i> nautical t.t. of ships and those who sail in them, who ‘come down’ fr. the ‘high seas’…<span class="greek">ἔις τι</span> <i>at someth</i>. a harbor 18:22; 21:3; 27:5.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402116"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402116">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Tyre</i> was a city and seaport on the coast of Phoenicia. From Patara to Tyre was about 400 mi (640 km). It required a large cargo ship over 100 ft (30 m) long, and was a four to five day voyage.</p></p>
<p id="n4402117"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 78 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνευρίσκω</span> has “<i>look/search for</i> (w. finding presupposed) <span class="greek">τινά</span>…<span class="greek">τοὺς μαθητάς</span> Ac 21:4.” The English verb “locate,” when used in reference to persons, has the implication of both looking for and finding someone. The participle <span class="greek">ἀνευρόντες</span> (<span class="translit">aneurontes</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402118"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 154 s.v. <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> states, “deictic adv. designating a position relatively near or far…<i>there</i>…Ac 21:4.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402119"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἔλεγον</span> (<span class="translit">elegon</span>) has been taken iteratively.</p></p>
<p id="n4402120"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402120">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> Although they told this to Paul <i>through the Spirit</i>, it appears Paul had a choice here (see v. 14). Therefore this amounted to a warning: There was risk in going to Jerusalem, so he was urged not to go.</p></p>
<p id="n4402121"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 367 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιβαίνω</span> places Ac 21:4 under 1, “<i>go up/upon, mount, board</i>…<span class="greek">πλοίῳ</span>…Ac 27:2…Abs. <i>go on board, embark</i>…21:1 D, 2.—So perh. also <span class="greek">ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> εἰς ᾿Ιεροσόλυμα</span> <i>embark for Jerusalem</i> (i.e., to the seaport of Caesarea) vs. 4.” BDAG notes, however, “But this pass. may also belong to 2. to move to an area and be there, <i>set foot in</i>.” Because the message from the disciples to Paul through the Holy Spirit has the character of a warning, the latter meaning has been adopted for this translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402123"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened that when.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402124"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “When our days were over.” L&amp;N 67.71 has “<span class="greek">ὅτε δὲ ἐγένετο ἡμᾶς ἐξαρτίσαι τὰς ἡμέρας</span> ‘when we brought that time to an end’ or ‘when our time with them was over’ Ac 21:5.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402125"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “accompanying.” Due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was begun in the translation and the participle <span class="greek">προπεμπόντων</span> (<span class="translit">propempontōn</span>) translated as a finite verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4402126"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “city, and after.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun.</p></p>
<p id="n4402127"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402127">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>praying</i> in Acts, see 1:14, 24; 2:47; 4:23; 6:6; 10:2; 12:5, 12; 13:3; 16:25.</p></p>
<p id="n4402128"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 98 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπασπάζομαι</span> has “<i>take leave of, say farewell to</i> <span class="greek">τινά</span> <i>someone</i>…<span class="greek">ἀπησπασάμεθα ἀλλήλους</span> <i>we said farewell to one another</i> Ac 21:6.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402129"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was begun in the translation, and <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the logical sequence.</p></p>
<p id="n4402130"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to their own”; the word “homes” is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4402131"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402131">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Tyre</i> was a city and seaport on the coast of Phoenicia.</p></p>
<p id="n4402132"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402132">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Ptolemais</i> was a seaport on the coast of Palestine about 30 mi (48 km) south of Tyre.</p></p>
<p id="n4402133"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “On the next day leaving, we came.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐξελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">exelthontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402134"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402134">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1. This was another 40 mi (65 km).</p></p>
<p id="n4402135"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and entering…we stayed.” The participle <span class="greek">εἰσελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">eiselthontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402136"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402136">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> Philip was <i>one of the seven</i> deacons appointed in the Jerusalem church (Acts 6:1-7).</p></p>
<p id="n4402137"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “virgin.” While the term <span class="greek">παρθένος</span> (<span class="translit">parthenos</span>) can refer to a woman who has never had sexual relations, the emphasis in this context seems to be on the fact that Philip’s daughters were not married (L&amp;N 9.39).</p></p>
<p id="n4402138"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402138">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is best taken as a parenthetical note by the author. Luke again noted women who were gifted in the early church (see Eusebius, <i>Ecclesiastical History</i> 3.31; 3.39).</p></p>
<p id="n4402139"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402139">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 848 s.v. <span class="greek">πολύς</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span> has “<span class="greek">ἐπὶ ἡμέρας πλείους</span> <i>for a (large) number of days, for many days</i>…Ac 13:31.—21:10…24:17; 25:14; 27:20.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402140"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402140">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Agabus</i> also appeared in Acts 11:28. He was from Jerusalem, so the two churches were still in contact with one another.</p></p>
<p id="n4402141"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And coming.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. The participle <span class="greek">ἐλθών</span> (<span class="translit">elthōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402142"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and taking.” This <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more. The participle <span class="greek">ἄρας</span> (<span class="translit">aras</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402143"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402143">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>belt</i> was a band or sash used to keep money as well as to gird up the tunic (BDAG 431 s.v. <span class="greek">ζώνη</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402144"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">δήσας</span> (<span class="translit">dēsas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402145"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “with it” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4402146"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and will deliver him over into the hands of” (a Semitic idiom).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The Jews…will tie up…and will hand him over</i>. As later events will show, the Jews in Jerusalem did not personally tie Paul up and hand him over to the Gentiles, but their reaction to him was the cause of his arrest (Acts 21:27-36).</p></p>
<p id="n4402147"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the people there.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402148"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402148">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term translated “breaking” as used by Josephus (<i>Ant</i>. 10.10.4 [10.207]) means to break something into pieces, but in its only NT use (it is a <i>hapax legomenon</i>) it is used figuratively (BDAG 972 s.v. <span class="greek">συνθρύπτω</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402149"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 18.13 has “to tie objects together—‘to tie, to tie together, to tie up.’” The verb <span class="greek">δέω</span> (<span class="translit">deō</span>) is sometimes figurative for imprisonment (L&amp;N 37.114), but it is preferable to translate it literally here in light of v. 11 where Agabus tied himself up with Paul’s belt.</p></p>
<p id="n4402150"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">πειθομένου</span> (<span class="translit">peithomenou</span>) in this genitive absolute construction has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4402151"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402151">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “we became silent, saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402152"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402152">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>“The Lord’s will be done.”</i> Since no one knew exactly what would happen, the matter was left in the Lord’s hands.</p></p>
<p id="n4402153"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402153">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “we made preparations.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402154"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402154">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “were going up”; the imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἀνεβαίνομεν</span> (<span class="translit">anebainomen</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect. </p><p><b>sn</b> In colloquial speech Jerusalem was always said to be “<i>up</i>” from any other location in Palestine. The group probably covered the 65 mi (105 km) in two days using horses. Their arrival in Jerusalem marked the end of Paul’s third missionary journey.</p></p>
<p id="n4402155"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402155">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402156"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402156">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to Mnason…”; the words “the house of” are not in the Greek text, but are implied by the verb <span class="greek">ξενισθῶμεν</span> (<span class="translit">xenisthōmen</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402157"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402157">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “Mnason of Cyprus, one of the original disciples.” BDAG 137 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀρχαῖος</span> 1 has “<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> μαθητής</span> <i>a disciple of long standing</i> (perh. <i>original disc</i>.) Ac 21:16.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402158"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402158">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “warmly” (see BDAG 144 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀσμένως</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402159"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402159">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 760 s.v. <span class="greek">παραγίνομαι</span> 1 has this use under the broad category of meaning “<i>draw near, come, arrive, be present</i>.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>All the elders were there</i>. This meeting shows how the Jerusalem church still regarded Paul and his mission with favor, but also with some concerns because of the rumors circulating about his actions.</p></p>
<p id="n4402160"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402160">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402161"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402161">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to report,” “to describe.” The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐξηγεῖτο</span> (<span class="translit">exēgeito</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4402162"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402162">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 293 s.v. <span class="greek">εἷς</span> 5.e has “<span class="greek">καθ᾿ ἕν</span> <i>one after the other</i> (hence <span class="greek">τὸ καθ᾿ ἕν</span> ‘a detailed list’: PLille 11, 8 [III bc]; PTebt. 47, 34; 332, 16) J 21:25. Also <span class="greek">καθ᾿ ἕν ἕκαστον</span>…Ac 21:19.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402163"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402163">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note how Paul credited <i>God</i> with the success of his ministry.</p></p>
<p id="n4402164"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402164">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “glorified.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402165"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402165">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “how many thousands there are among the Jews.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>How many thousands of Jews</i>. See Acts 2-5 for the accounts of their conversion, esp. 2:41 and 4:4. Estimates of the total number of Jews living in Jerusalem at the time range from 20,000 to 50,000.</p></p>
<p id="n4402166"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402166">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “are all zealous for the law.” BDAG 427 s.v. <span class="greek">ζηλωτής</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">β</span> has “of thing…<span class="greek">τοῦ νόμου</span> <i>an ardent observer of the law</i> Ac 21:20.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402167"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402167">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, the <i>law</i> of Moses. These Jewish Christians had remained close to their Jewish practices after becoming believers (1 Cor 7:18-19; Acts 16:3).</p></p>
<p id="n4402168"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402168">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 511 s.v. <span class="greek">κατά</span> B.1.a has “<span class="greek">τοὺς κ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὰ ἔθνη ᾿Ιουδαίους</span> <i>the Judeans (dispersed) throughout the nations</i> 21:21.” The Jews in view are not those in Palestine, but those who are scattered throughout the Gentile world.</p></p>
<p id="n4402169"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402169">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to forsake,” “to rebel against.” BDAG 120 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀποστασία</span> has “<span class="greek">ἀποστασίαν διδάσκεις ἀπὸ Μωϋσέως</span> <i>you teach (Judeans) to abandon Moses</i> Ac 21:21.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The charge that Paul was teaching Jews in the Diaspora <i>to abandon Moses</i> was different from the issue faced in Acts 15, where the question was whether Gentiles needed to become like Jews first in order to become Christians. The issue also appears in Acts 24:5-6, 13-21; 25:8.</p></p>
<p id="n4402170"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402170">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, not to circumcise their male children. Biblical references to circumcision always refer to male circumcision.</p></p>
<p id="n4402171"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402171">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “or walk.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402172"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402172">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 71.16 has “pertaining to being in every respect certain—‘certainly, really, doubtless, no doubt.’…‘they will no doubt hear that you have come’ Ac 21:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402173"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402173">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do this that.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402174"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402174">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “There are four men here.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402175"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402175">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 33.469 has “‘there are four men here who have taken a vow’ or ‘we have four men who…’ Ac 21:23.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402176"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402176">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term for “vow,” see BDAG 416 s.v. <span class="greek">εὐχή</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4402177"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402177">77</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, undergo ritual cleansing. Paul’s cleansing would be necessary because of his travels in “unclean” Gentile territory. This act would represent a conciliatory gesture. Paul would have supported a “law-free” mission to the Gentiles as an option, but this gesture would represent an attempt to be sensitive to the Jews (1 Cor 9:15-22).</p></p>
<p id="n4402178"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402178">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 57.146 has “<span class="greek">δαπάνησον ἐπ᾿ αὐτοῖς</span> ‘pay their expenses’ Ac 21:24.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402179"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402179">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> The future middle indicative has causative force here. BDAG 686 s.v. <span class="greek">ξυράω</span> has “mid. <i>have oneself shaved</i>…<span class="greek">τὴν κεφαλήν</span> <i>have one</i>’<i>s head shaved</i>…Ac 21:24.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Having <i>their heads shaved</i> probably involved ending a voluntary Nazirite vow (Num 6:14-15).</p></p>
<p id="n4402180"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402180">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was begun in the translation, and <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the logical sequence.</p></p>
<p id="n4402181"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402181">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb here describes a report or some type of information (BDAG 534 s.v. <span class="greek">κατηχέω</span> 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4402182"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402182">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “adhere to the keeping of the law.” L&amp;N 41.12 has “<span class="greek">στοιχέω</span>: to live in conformity with some presumed standard or set of customs—‘to live, to behave in accordance with.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4402183"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402183">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The law</i> refers to the law of Moses.</p></p>
<p id="n4402185"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402185">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 13.154 has “‘having decided that they must keep themselves from food offered to idols, from blood, from an animal that has been strangled, and from sexual immorality’ Ac 21:25.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Having decided</i> refers here to the decision of the Jerusalem council (Acts 15:6-21). Mention of this previous decision reminds the reader that the issue here is somewhat different: It is not whether Gentiles must first become Jews before they can become Christians (as in Acts 15), but whether Jews who become Christians should retain their Jewish practices. Sensitivity to this issue would suggest that Jewish Christians and Gentile Christians might engage in different practices.</p></p>
<p id="n4402186"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402186">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a different Greek word than the one used in Acts 15:20, 29. BDAG 1068 s.v. <span class="greek">φυλάσσω</span> 3 has “to be on one’s guard against<i>, look out for,</i> avoid…w. acc. of pers. or thing avoided…Ac 21:25.” The Greek word used in Acts 15:20, 29 is <span class="greek">ἀπέχω</span> (<span class="translit">apechō</span>). The difference in meaning, although slight, has been maintained in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402187"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402187">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is no specific semantic component in the Greek word <span class="greek">εἰδωλόθυτος</span> that means “meat” (see BDAG 280 s.v. <span class="greek">εἰδωλόθυτος</span>; L&amp;N 5.15). The stem—<span class="greek">θυτος</span> means “sacrifice” (referring to an animal sacrificially killed) and thereby implies meat.</p></p>
<p id="n4402188"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402188">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>What has been strangled</i>. That is, to refrain from eating animals that had been killed without having the blood drained from them. According to the Mosaic law (Lev 17:13-14) Jews were forbidden to eat flesh with the blood still in it (note the preceding provision in this verse, <i>and blood</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402189"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402189">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 422 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔχω</span> 11.b.<span class="greek">β</span> has “temporal, to be next, <i>immediately following</i>…<span class="greek">τῇ ἐχομένῃ</span>…<i>on the next day</i> Lk 13:33…Ac 20:15; w. <span class="greek">ἡμέρᾳ</span> added…21:26.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402190"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402190">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, after he had undergone ritual cleansing. The aorist passive participle <span class="greek">ἁγνισθείς</span> (<span class="translit">hagnistheis</span>) has been taken temporally of antecedent action.</p></p>
<p id="n4402191"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402191">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “entered the temple, giving notice.” The participle <span class="greek">διαγγέλλων</span> (<span class="translit">diangellōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402192"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402192">92</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>days of purification</i> refers to the days of ritual cleansing.</p></p>
<p id="n4402193"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402193">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “until” (BDAG 423 s.v. <span class="greek">ἕως</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">β</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>), but since in English it is somewhat awkward to say “the completion of the days of purification, until the sacrifice would be offered,” the temporal clause was translated “when the sacrifice would be offered.” The point is that the sacrifice would be offered when the days were completed. Paul honored the request of the Jewish Christian leadership completely. As the following verse makes clear, the vow was made for seven days.</p></p>
<p id="n4402194"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402194">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for each one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402195"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402195">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 975 s.v. <span class="greek">συντελέω</span> 4 has “to come to an end of a duration, <i>come to an end, be over</i>…Ac 21:27.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402196"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402196">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p><p><b>sn</b> Note how there is a sense of Paul being pursued from a distance. These Jews may well have been from Ephesus, since they recognized Trophimus the Ephesian (v. 29).</p></p>
<p id="n4402197"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402197">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the temple.” See the note on the word “temple” in v. 28.</p></p>
<p id="n4402198"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402198">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “threw the whole crowd into consternation.” L&amp;N 25.221 has “<span class="greek">συνέχεον πάντα τὸν ὄχλον</span> ‘they threw the whole crowd into consternation’ Ac 21:27. It is also possible to render the expression in Ac 21:27 as ‘they stirred up the whole crowd.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4402199"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n4402199">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and laid hands on.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021100"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Israelite men,” although this is less natural English. The Greek term here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which only exceptionally is used in a generic sense of both males and females. In this context, it is conceivable that this is a generic usage since “the whole crowd” is mentioned in v. 27, although it can also be argued that these remarks were addressed primarily to the men present, even if women were there.</p></p>
<p id="n44021101"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021101">101</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The law</i> refers to the law of Moses.</p></p>
<p id="n44021102"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this place.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>This sanctuary</i> refers to the temple. The charges were not new, but were similar to those made against Stephen (Acts 6:14) and Jesus (Luke 23:2).</p></p>
<p id="n44021103"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 400 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔτι</span> 2.b has “<span class="greek">ἔ</span>.<span class="greek"> δὲ καί</span> <i>furthermore</i>…al. <span class="greek">ἔ</span>.<span class="greek"> τε καί</span>…Lk 14:26; Ac 21:28.” This is a continuation of the same sentence in Greek, but due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English to use shorter sentences, a new sentence was begun here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n44021104"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “into the temple.” The specific reference is to the Court of the Sons of Israel (see the note following the term “unclean” at the end of this verse). To avoid giving the modern reader the impression that they entered the temple building itself, the phrase “the inner courts of the temple” has been used in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n44021105"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and has defiled this holy place.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Has brought Greeks…unclean</i>. Note how the issue is both religious and ethnic, showing a different attitude by the Jews. A Gentile was not permitted to enter the inner temple precincts (contrast Eph 2:11-22). According to Josephus (<i>Ant</i>. 15.11.5 [15.417]; <i>J. W</i>. 5.5.2 [5.193], cf. 5.5.6 [5.227]), the inner temple courts (the Court of the Women, the Court of the Sons of Israel, and the Court of the Priests) were raised slightly above the level of the Court of the Gentiles and were surrounded by a wall about 5 ft (1.5 m) high. Notices in both Greek and Latin (two of which have been discovered) warned that any Gentiles who ventured into the inner courts would be responsible for their own deaths. See also Philo, <i>Embassy</i> 31 (212). In <i>m. Middot</i> 2:3 this wall was called “<i>soreq</i>” and according to <i>m. Sanhedrin</i> 9:6 the stranger who trespassed beyond the <i>soreq</i> would die by the hand of God.</p></p>
<p id="n44021106"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whom.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021107"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the phrase “inner temple courts” see the note on the word “temple” in v. 28.</p><p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author. The note explains the cause of the charge and also notes that it was false.</p></p>
<p id="n44021108"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term see BDAG 545 s.v. <span class="greek">κινέω</span> 2.b.</p></p>
<p id="n44021109"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the people formed a mob.” BDAG 967 s.v. <span class="greek">συνδρομή</span> has “formation of a mob by pers. running together, <i>running together</i>…<span class="greek">ἐγένετο σ</span>.<span class="greek"> τοῦ λαοῦ</span> <i>the people rushed together</i> Ac 21:30.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021110"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and seizing.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιλαβόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">epilabomenoi</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was begun in the translation, and <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n44021111"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “out of the temple.” See the note on the word “temple” in v. 28.</p></p>
<p id="n44021112"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seeking.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021113"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “information” (originally concerning a crime; BDAG 1050 s.v. <span class="greek">φάσις</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n44021114"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “went up”; this verb is used because the report went up to the Antonia Fortress where the Roman garrison was stationed.</p></p>
<p id="n44021115"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). In Greek the term <span class="greek">χιλίαρχος</span> (<span class="translit">chiliarchos</span>) literally described the “commander of a thousand,” but it was used as the standard translation for the Latin <i>tribunus militum</i> or <i>tribunus militare</i>, the military tribune who commanded a cohort of 600 men.</p></p>
<p id="n44021116"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021116">116</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>cohort</i> was a Roman military unit of about 600 soldiers, one-tenth of a legion.</p></p>
<p id="n44021117"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 953 s.v. <span class="greek">συγχέω</span> has “Pass. w. act.force <i>be in confusion</i>…<span class="greek">ὅλη συγχύννεται ᾿Ιερουσαλήμ</span> 21:31.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021118"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English to use shorter sentences, the relative pronoun (“who”) was translated as a pronoun (“he”) and a new sentence was begun here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n44021119"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “taking…ran down.” The participle <span class="greek">κατέδραμεν</span> (<span class="translit">katedramen</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44021120"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021120">120</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n44021121"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to them”; the referent (the crowd) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44021122"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seeing.” The participle <span class="greek">ἰδόντες</span> (<span class="translit">idontes</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n44021123"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 31.</p></p>
<p id="n44021124"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021124">124</a> <p><b>sn</b> The mob <i>stopped beating Paul</i> because they feared the Romans would arrest them for disturbing the peace and for mob violence. They would let the Roman officials take care of the matter from this point on.</p></p>
<p id="n44021125"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 31.</p></p>
<p id="n44021126"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seized.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021127"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> The <i>two chains</i> would be something like handcuffs (BDAG 48 s.v. <span class="greek">ἅλυσις</span> and compare Acts 28:20).</p></p>
<p id="n44021128"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was begun in the translation, and <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been replaced with a semicolon. “Then” has been supplied after “he” to clarify the logical sequence.</p></p>
<p id="n44021129"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and what it is”; this has been simplified to “what.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021130"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 33.77 has “<span class="greek">ἄλλοι δὲ ἄλλο τι ἐπεφώνουν ἐν τῷ ὄχλῳ</span> ‘some in the crowd shouted one thing; others, something else’ Ac 21:34.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021131"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the commanding officer) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44021132"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> This genitive absolute construction has been translated temporally; it could also be taken causally: “and since the commanding officer was unable to find out the truth.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021133"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “find out what had happened”; <i>Grk</i> “the certainty” (BDAG 147 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀσφαλής</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n44021134"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “clamor,” “uproar” (BDAG 458 s.v. <span class="greek">θόρυβος</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n44021135"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44021136"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the headquarters.” BDAG 775 s.v. <span class="greek">παρεμβολή</span> 2 has “<i>barracks/headquarters</i> of the Roman troops in Jerusalem Ac 21:34, 37; 22:24; 23:10, 16, 32.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021137"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44021138"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021138">138</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Paul had to be carried</i>. Note how the arrest really ended up protecting Paul. The crowd is portrayed as irrational at this point.</p></p>
<p id="n44021139"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021139">139</a> <p><b>tn</b> This refers to mob violence (BDAG 175 s.v. <span class="greek">βία</span> b).</p></p>
<p id="n44021140"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the multitude of people.” While <span class="greek">πλῆθος</span> (<span class="translit">plēthos</span>) is articular, it has been translated “a crowd” since it was probably a subset of the larger mob that gathered in v. 30.</p></p>
<p id="n44021141"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021141">141</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “them” is not in the Greek text but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n44021142"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021142">142</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the headquarters.” BDAG 775 s.v. <span class="greek">παρεμβολή</span> 2 has “<i>barracks/headquarters</i> of the Roman troops in Jerusalem Ac 21:34, 37; 22:24; 23:10, 16, 32.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021143"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021143">143</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “says” (a historical present).</p></p>
<p id="n44021144"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021144">144</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers) See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 31.</p></p>
<p id="n44021145"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021145">145</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Is it permitted for me to say” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n44021146"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021146">146</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (the officer) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44021147"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021147">147</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021148"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021148">148</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>“Do you know Greek?”</i> Paul as an educated rabbi was bilingual. Paul’s request in Greek allowed the officer to recognize that Paul was not the violent insurrectionist he thought he had arrested (see following verse). The confusion of identities reveals the degree of confusion dominating these events.</p></p>
<p id="n44021149"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021149">149</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 39.41 has “<span class="greek">οὐκ ἄρα σὺ εἶ ὁ Αἰγύπτιος ὁ πρὸ τούτων τῶν ἡμερῶν ἀναστατώσας</span> ‘then you are not that Egyptian who some time ago started a rebellion’ Ac 21:38.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021150"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021150">150</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of the <i>Sicarii</i>.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The term “<i>Assassins</i>” is found several times in the writings of Josephus (<i>J. W</i>. 2.13.3 [2.254-257]; <i>Ant</i>. 20.8.10 [20.186]). It was the name of the most fanatical group among the Jewish nationalists, very hostile to Rome, who did not hesitate to assassinate their political opponents. They were named <i>Sicarii</i> in Latin after their weapon of choice, the short dagger or <i>sicarius</i> which could be easily hidden under one’s clothing. In effect, the officer who arrested Paul had thought he was dealing with a terrorist.</p></p>
<p id="n44021151"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021151">151</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021152"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021152">152</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “before these days.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021153"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021153">153</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021154"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021154">154</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a Jewish man.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021155"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021155">155</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of a not insignificant city.” The double negative, common in Greek, is awkward in English and has been replaced by a corresponding positive expression (BDAG 142 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄσημος</span> 1).</p></p>
<p id="n44021156"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021156">156</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I beg you.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021157"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021157">157</a> <p><b>tn</b> The referent (the commanding officer) has been supplied here in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44021158"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021158">158</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “When he gave permission.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιτρέψαντος</span> (<span class="translit">epitrepsantos</span>) is part of a genitive absolute construction and has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44021159"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021159">159</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “standing.” The participle <span class="greek">ἑστώς</span> (<span class="translit">hestōs</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44021160"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021160">160</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “motioned.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021161"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021161">161</a> <p><b>tn</b> <span class="greek">γενομένης</span> (<span class="translit">genomenēs</span>) has been taken temporally. BDAG 922 s.v. <span class="greek">σιγή</span> has “<span class="greek">πολλῆς σιγῆς γενομένης</span> <i>when a great silence had fallen</i> = <i>when they had become silent</i> Ac 21:40.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021162"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021162">162</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “spoke out to.” L&amp;N 33.27 has “to address an audience, with possible emphasis upon loudness—‘to address, to speak out to.’ <span class="greek">πολλῆς δέ σιγῆς γενομένης προσεφώνησεν τῇ ᾿Εβραίδι διαλέκτῳ</span> ‘when they were quiet, he addressed them in Hebrew’ Ac 21:40.”</p></p>
<p id="n44021163"><a href="file1083.xhtml#n44021163">163</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the Hebrew dialect, saying.” This refers to the Aramaic spoken in Palestine in the 1st century (BDAG 270 s.v. <span class="greek">῾Εβραΐς</span>). The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
