<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 14</h2>
<p id="n400141"><a href="file983.xhtml#n400141">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>tetrarch</i>, a ruler with rank and authority lower than a king, ruled only with the approval of the Roman authorities. This was roughly equivalent to being governor of a region. Several times in the NT, Herod, tetrarch of Galilee, is called a king (Matt 14:9, Mark 6:14-29), reflecting popular usage rather than an official title.</p></p>
<p id="n400142"><a href="file983.xhtml#n400142">2</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> C D L N W Z <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> 0106 ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33 565 579 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat) read <span class="greek">αὐτόν</span> (<span class="translit">auton</span>, “him”) here as a way of clarifying the direct object; various significant witnesses lack the word, however (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B 700 ff<sup>1</sup> h q <i>al</i>). The original wording most likely lacked it, but it has been included here due to English style. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating reservations about its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n400143"><a href="file983.xhtml#n400143">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect tense verb is here rendered with an iterative force.</p></p>
<p id="n400144"><a href="file983.xhtml#n400144">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> This marriage of Herod to <i>his brother Philip’s wife</i> was a violation of OT law (Lev 18:16; 20:21). In addition, both Herod Antipas and Herodias had each left marriages to enter into this union.</p></p>
<p id="n400145"><a href="file983.xhtml#n400145">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400146"><a href="file983.xhtml#n400146">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Herod) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n400147"><a href="file983.xhtml#n400147">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him” (also in the following phrase, <i>Grk</i> “accepted him”); in both cases the referent (John) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n400148"><a href="file983.xhtml#n400148">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek text reads here <span class="greek">ὁμολογέω</span> (<span class="translit">homologeō</span>); though normally translated “acknowledge, confess,” BDAG (708 s.v. 1) lists “assure, promise” for certain contexts such as here.</p></p>
<p id="n400149"><a href="file983.xhtml#n400149">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and being grieved, the king commanded.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Herod was technically not a <i>king</i>, but this reflects popular usage. See the note on <i>tetrarch</i> in 14:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4001410"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4001411"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And his”; the referent (John the Baptist) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4001412"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (John) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001413"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001413">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note at Matt 4:21 for a description of the first-century fishing boat discovered in 1986 near Tiberias on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n4001414"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “it” is not in the Greek text but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4001415"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “cities.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001416"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a desert” (meaning a deserted or desolate area with sparse vegetation).</p></p>
<p id="n4001417"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001417">17</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The majority of witnesses read <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsous</span>, “Jesus”) here, perhaps to clarify the subject. Although only a few Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, along with several versional witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* D Z<sup>vid</sup> 579 1424 e k sy<sup>s,c,p</sup> sa bo), lack the name of Jesus, the omission does not seem to be either accidental or malicious and is therefore judged to be most likely the original reading. Nevertheless, a decision is difficult. NA<sup>28</sup> has the word in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4001418"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the pronoun <span class="greek">ὑμεῖς</span> (<span class="translit">humeis</span>) is used, making “you” in the translation emphatic.</p></p>
<p id="n4001419"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001420"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001421"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after instructing the crowds to recline for a meal on the grass, after taking the five loaves and the two fish, after looking up to heaven, he gave thanks, and after breaking the loaves he gave them to the disciples.” Although most of the participles are undoubtedly attendant circumstance, there are but two indicative verbs—“he gave thanks” and “he gave.” The structure of the sentence thus seems to focus on these two actions and has been translated accordingly.</p></p>
<p id="n4001422"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowds.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001423"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4001424"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The boat was already many stades from the land.” A stade (<span class="greek">στάδιον</span>, <span class="translit">stadion</span>) was a unit of distance about 607 feet (185 meters) long.</p></p>
<p id="n4001425"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “In the fourth watch of the night,” that is, between 3 a.m. and 6 a.m.</p></p>
<p id="n4001426"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “on the lake.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001427"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001428"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001428">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on the sea”; or “on the lake.” The translation “water” has been used here for stylistic reasons (cf. the same phrase in v. 25).</p></p>
<p id="n4001429"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001429">29</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses have <span class="greek">ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (<span class="translit">ho Iēsous</span>, “Jesus”), while a few lack the words (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* D 073 892 ff<sup>1</sup> sy<sup>c</sup> sa bo). Although such additions are often suspect (due to liturgical influences, piety, or for the sake of clarity), in this case it is likely that <span class="greek">ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς</span> dropped out accidentally. Apart from a few albeit significant witnesses, as noted above, the rest of the tradition has either <span class="greek">ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς</span> <span class="greek">αὐτοῖς</span> (<span class="translit">ho Iēsous autois</span>) or <span class="greek">αὐτοῖς ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (<span class="translit">autois ho Iēsous</span>). In majuscule letters, with Jesus’ name as a <i>nomen sacrum</i>, this would have been written as <span class="uncial">autoisois_</span> or <span class="uncial">ois_autois</span>. Thus homoioteleuton could explain the reason for the omission of Jesus’ name. (This same phenomenon occurs in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>137</sup> at Mark 1:17 where the original text no doubt read <span class="greek">αὐτοῖς ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς</span>, but this papyrus accidentally omits the <i>nomen sacrum</i>.)</p></p>
<p id="n4001430"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he said to them, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001431"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001432"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001432">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering him, Peter said.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> (<span class="translit">apokritheis</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001433"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001433">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he cried out, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001434"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001434">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Gennesaret</i> was a fertile plain south of Capernaum (see also Mark 6:53). The Sea of Galilee was also sometimes known as the Sea of Gennesaret (Luke 5:1).</p></p>
<p id="n4001435"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001435">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men”; the word here (<span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span>, <span class="translit">anēr</span>) usually indicates males or husbands, but occasionally is used in a generic sense of people in general, as here (cf. BDAG 79 s.v. 1.a, 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4001436"><a href="file983.xhtml#n4001436">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “asked that they might touch.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
