<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Thessalonians 3</h2>
<p id="n520032"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n520032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n520033"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n520033">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> A variety of readings occurs in this verse. Instead of “and fellow worker for God” (<span class="greek">καὶ συνεργὸν τοῦ θεοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">kai sunergon tou theou</span>), B and 1962 have “and fellow worker” (<span class="greek">καὶ συνεργόν</span>); <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 6 81 629* 1241 1739 1881 2464 lat co read “and servant of God” (<span class="greek">καὶ διάκονον τοῦ θεοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">kai diakonon tou theou</span>); D<sup>2</sup> 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> and a few versional witnesses read “and a servant of God and our fellow worker” (<span class="greek">καὶ διάκονον τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ συνεργὸν ἡμῶν</span>); and F G have “servant and fellow worker for God” (<span class="greek">διάκονον καὶ συνεργὸν τοῦ θεοῦ</span>). The reading of the text (<span class="greek">καὶ συνεργὸν τοῦ θεοῦ</span>) is found in D* 33 b d m o Ambst Pel. It may be argued that all readings that do not collocate <span class="greek">συνεργόν</span> with <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> are secondary, as this is certainly the harder reading. Indeed, in only one other place in the NT are human beings said to be <span class="greek">συνεργοὶ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">sunergoi theou</span>; 1 Cor 3:9), and the simplest (though by no means the only) interpretation is that the genitive should be taken associatively (“a fellow worker <i>in association with</i> God”). It is difficult to account for <span class="greek">συνεργὸν τοῦ θεοῦ</span> here unless it is authentic because of the theological difficulty that would be easily seen in this wording. (However, the text in 1 Cor 3:9 is solid [<span class="greek">Χριστοῦ</span>(<span class="translit">Christou</span>) is found in 2400, a thirteenth-century minuscule; no other variants are known]. This gives some pause to attributing theological difficulty as a cause for scribal alteration in our passage.) A genealogy of the readings suggests that various scribes may have deleted <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span> or swapped <span class="greek">διάκονον</span> for <span class="greek">συνεργόν</span> to remove the offense. The readings of the Byzantine text and two Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (F G) appear to be conflations of earlier readings, but the reading of F G nevertheless indirectly supports <span class="greek">καὶ συνεργὸν τοῦ θεοῦ</span> since it does not remove the offense. Although the witnesses for <span class="greek">καὶ συνεργὸν τοῦ θεοῦ</span> are minimal, the internal evidence is quite strong in favor of this reading. With hesitation, it is adopted as authentic.</p><p><b>tn</b> Although 1 Thess 3:2 is frequently understood to mean that Timothy is “God’s fellow worker,” such a view assumes that the genitive <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">theou</span>) is associative for it is related to <span class="greek">συνεργόν</span> (<span class="translit">sunergon</span>). However, a genitive of association is not required by the syntax (cf. <i>ExSyn</i> 130), and it almost certainly is contrary to Paul’s theological outlook. See <b>sn</b> at 1 Cor 3:9.</p></p>
<p id="n520034"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n520034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “just as it also occurred and you know.”</p></p>
<p id="n520035"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n520035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for this reason.”</p></p>
<p id="n520036"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n520036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but now Timothy having come,” a subordinate clause leading to the main clause of v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n520037"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n520037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you have a good remembrance of us always.”</p></p>
<p id="n520038"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n520038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “just as also we you.”</p></p>
<p id="n520039"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n520039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for this reason.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200310"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n5200310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5200311"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n5200311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because now we live,” in comparison with his feelings of dread in not knowing how they were doing (cf. 2:17-3:5).</p></p>
<p id="n5200312"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n5200312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “what thanks can we render to God about you.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200313"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n5200313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all the joy with which we rejoice.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200314"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n5200314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to see your face.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200315"><a href="file1166.xhtml#n5200315">15</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Significant and early witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A D* 81 629 lat bo) have <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”) at the end of this benediction, while the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, including several excellent authorities (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> B D<sup>2</sup> F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 1175 1241 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it sy sa), lack the particle. A decision is difficult, but in light of Paul’s habit of adding the <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> to his notes of praise, even in the middle of his letters (cf. Rom 9:5; 11:36; 15:33; Gal 1:5), one might expect scribes to emulate this practice. Although a decision is difficult, since there is little reason for scribes to omit the particle, it is best to follow the shorter reading. NA<sup>28</sup> has the particle in brackets, indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
