<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Corinthians 12</h2>
<p id="n470121"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n470121">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Boasting is necessary.”</p></p>
<p id="n470122"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n470122">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> In the NT, <i>paradise</i> is mentioned three times. In Luke 23:43 it refers to the abode of the righteous dead. In Rev 2:7 it refers to the restoration of Edenic paradise predicted in Isa 51:3 and Ezek 36:35. The reference here in 2 Cor 12:4 is probably to be translated as parallel to the mention of the “third heaven” in v. 2. Assuming that the “first heaven” would be atmospheric heaven (the sky) and “second heaven” the more distant stars and planets, “third heaven” would refer to the place where God dwells. This is much more likely than some variation on the seven heavens mentioned in the pseudepigraphic book <i>2 Enoch</i> and in other nonbiblical and rabbinic works.</p></p>
<p id="n470123"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n470123">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “things that cannot be put into words.”</p></p>
<p id="n470124"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n470124">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a man.”</p></p>
<p id="n470125"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n470125">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “speaking.”</p></p>
<p id="n470126"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n470126">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “may think of.”</p></p>
<p id="n470127"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n470127">7</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) lack <span class="greek">διό</span> (<span class="translit">dio</span>, “Therefore”), but the widespread distribution and quality of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> which include it (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B F G 0243 33 81 1175 1739) argues for its authenticity. Internally, its case is equally strong in that its inclusion is grammatically rough (<span class="greek">διό</span> is hardly necessary to convey purpose, especially since Paul uses <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> [<span class="translit">hina</span>, “so that”] next).</p></p>
<p id="n470128"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n470128">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to harass.”</p></p>
<p id="n470129"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n470129">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “so that I might not become arrogant” is repeated here because it occurs in the Greek text two times in the verse. Although redundant, it is repeated because of the emphatic nature of its affirmation.</p></p>
<p id="n4701210"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” because of the contrast implicit in the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4701211"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is sufficient.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701212"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701212">12</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A<sup>c</sup> D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0243 0278 33 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) as well as some versional witnesses include the pronoun “my” here, but the omission of the pronoun has excellent external support (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A* B D* F G latt). Scribes probably added the pronoun for clarity, making the obvious referent explicit. This would also make “power” more parallel with “my grace.” Though the original text probably did not include “my,” scribes who added the word were following the sense of Paul’s statement.</p><p><b>tn</b> The pronoun “my” was supplied in the translation to clarify the sense of Paul’s expression.</p></p>
<p id="n4701213"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “my power comes to full strength.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701214"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Most gladly,” a comparative form used with superlative meaning and translated as such.</p></p>
<p id="n4701215"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “may rest on.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701216"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I take delight in.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701217"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “calamities.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701218"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I am in no way inferior.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701219"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “patience,” “endurance.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701220"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and miracles.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701221"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For in what respect.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701222"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “children ought not,” but this might give the impression that children are not supposed to support sick or aging parents in need of help. That is not what Paul is saying. His point is that children should not have to pay their parent’s way.</p></p>
<p id="n4701223"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “souls.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701224"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek construction anticipates a negative answer, indicated by the ‘tag’ question “have I?” at the end of the clause. The question is rhetorical.</p></p>
<p id="n4701225"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to visit you” are not in the Greek text but are implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, and must be supplied for the modern reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4701226"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701227"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek construction anticipates a negative answer, indicated by the ‘tag’ question “did he?” at the end of the clause.</p></p>
<p id="n4701228"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “[Did we not walk] in the same tracks?” This is an idiom that means to imitate someone else or to behave as they do. Paul’s point is that he and Titus have conducted themselves in the same way toward the Corinthians. If Titus did not take advantage of the Corinthians, then neither did Paul.</p></p>
<p id="n4701229"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701229">29</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading “all this time” (<span class="greek">πάλαι</span>, <span class="translit">palai</span>) is found in several early and significant Alexandrian and Western witnesses including <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B F G 0243 6 33 81 365 1175 1739 1881 lat; the reading <span class="greek">πάλιν</span> (<span class="translit">palin</span>, “again”) is read by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy bo; the reading <span class="greek">οὐ πάλαι</span> (<span class="translit">ou palai</span>) is read by <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup>, making the question even more emphatic. The reading of <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> could only have arisen from <span class="greek">πάλαι</span>. The reading <span class="greek">πάλιν</span> is significantly easier (“are you once again thinking that we are defending ourselves?”), for it softens Paul’s tone considerably. It thus seems to be a motivated reading and cannot easily explain the rise of <span class="greek">πάλαι</span>. Further, <span class="greek">πάλαι</span> has considerable support in the Alexandrian and Western witnesses, rendering it virtually certain as the autographic wording here.</p></p>
<p id="n4701230"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for your strengthening”; <i>Grk</i> “for your edification.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701231"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and I will be found by you.” The passive construction has been converted to an active one in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4701232"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “I am afraid that” are not repeated in the Greek text, but are needed for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4701233"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “intense anger, hostility.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701234"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “I am afraid that” are not repeated in the Greek text from v. 20, but are needed for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4701235"><a href="file1137.xhtml#n4701235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I will mourn over.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
