<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Corinthians 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Corinthians<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Rights of an Apostle</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:1</span> Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord? <span class="verse">9:2</span> If I am not an apostle to others, at least I am to you, for you are the confirming sign<sup><a id="n460091" href="file1117_notes.xhtml#n460091">1</a></sup> of my apostleship in the Lord. <span class="verse">9:3</span> This is my defense to those who examine me. <span class="verse">9:4</span> Do we not have the right to financial support?<sup><a id="n460092" href="file1117_notes.xhtml#n460092">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:5</span> Do we not have the right to the company of a believing wife, like the other apostles and the Lord’s brothers and Cephas?<sup><a id="n460093" href="file1117_notes.xhtml#n460093">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:6</span> Or do only Barnabas and I lack the right not to work? <span class="verse">9:7</span> Who ever serves in the army at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat its fruit? Who tends a flock and does not consume its milk? <span class="verse">9:8</span> Am I saying these things only on the basis of common sense,<sup><a id="n460094" href="file1117_notes.xhtml#n460094">4</a></sup> or does the law not say this as well? <span class="verse">9:9</span> For it is written in the law of Moses, “<b><i>Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n460095" href="file1117_notes.xhtml#n460095">5</a></sup> God is not concerned here about oxen, is he? <span class="verse">9:10</span> Or is he not surely speaking for our benefit? It was written for us, because the one plowing and threshing ought to work in hope of enjoying the harvest. <span class="verse">9:11</span> If we sowed spiritual blessings among you, is it too much to reap material things from you? <span class="verse">9:12</span> If others receive this right from you, are we not more deserving?</p>
<p class="bodytext">But we have not made use of this right. Instead we endure everything so that we may not be a hindrance to the gospel of Christ. <span class="verse">9:13</span> Don’t you know that those who serve in the temple<sup><a id="n460096" href="file1117_notes.xhtml#n460096">6</a></sup> eat food from the temple, and those who serve at the altar receive a part of the offerings? <span class="verse">9:14</span> In the same way the Lord commanded those who proclaim the gospel to receive their living by the gospel. <span class="verse">9:15</span> But I have not used any of these rights. And I am not writing these things so that something will be done for me.<sup><a id="n460097" href="file1117_notes.xhtml#n460097">7</a></sup> In fact, it would be better for me to die than—no one will deprive me of my reason for boasting!<sup><a id="n460098" href="file1117_notes.xhtml#n460098">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:16</span> For if I preach the gospel, I have no reason for boasting, because I am compelled to do this. Woe to me if I do not preach the gospel! <span class="verse">9:17</span> For if I do this voluntarily, I have a reward. But if I do it unwillingly, I am entrusted with a responsibility. <span class="verse">9:18</span> What then is my reward? That when I preach the gospel I may offer the gospel free of charge, and so not make full use of my rights in the gospel. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:19</span> For since I am free from all I can make myself a slave to all, in order to gain even more people.<sup><a id="n460099" href="file1117_notes.xhtml#n460099">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:20</span> To the Jews I became like a Jew to gain the Jews. To those under the law I became like one under the law (though I myself am not under the law)<sup><a id="n4600910" href="file1117_notes.xhtml#n4600910">10</a></sup> to gain those under the law. <span class="verse">9:21</span> To those free from the law I became like one free from the law (though I am not free from God’s law but under the law of Christ) to gain those free from the law. <span class="verse">9:22</span> To the weak I became weak in order to gain the weak. I have become all things to all people, so that by all means I may save some. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:23</span> I do all these things because of the gospel, so that I can be a participant in it. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:24</span> Do you not know that all the runners in a stadium compete, but only one receives the prize? So run to win. <span class="verse">9:25</span> Each competitor must exercise self-control in everything. They do it to receive a perishable crown, but we an imperishable one. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:26</span> So I do not run uncertainly or box like one who hits only air. <span class="verse">9:27</span> Instead I subdue my body and make it my slave, so that after preaching to others I myself will not be disqualified. </p>

</body>
</html>