<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Revelation 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Revelation<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Great Prostitute and the Beast</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:1</span> Then<sup><a id="n660171" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n660171">1</a></sup> one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and spoke to me.<sup><a id="n660172" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n660172">2</a></sup> “Come,” he said, “I will show you the condemnation and punishment<sup><a id="n660173" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n660173">3</a></sup> of the great prostitute who sits on many waters, <span class="verse">17:2</span> with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality and the earth’s inhabitants got drunk with the wine of her immorality.”<sup><a id="n660174" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n660174">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">17:3</span> So<sup><a id="n660175" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n660175">5</a></sup> he carried me away in the Spirit<sup><a id="n660176" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n660176">6</a></sup> to a wilderness,<sup><a id="n660177" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n660177">7</a></sup> and there<sup><a id="n660178" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n660178">8</a></sup> I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast that was full of blasphemous names and had seven heads and ten horns. <span class="verse">17:4</span> Now<sup><a id="n660179" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n660179">9</a></sup> the woman was dressed in purple and scarlet clothing,<sup><a id="n6601710" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601710">10</a></sup> and adorned with gold,<sup><a id="n6601711" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601711">11</a></sup> precious stones, and pearls. She held<sup><a id="n6601712" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601712">12</a></sup> in her hand a golden cup filled with detestable things and unclean things from her sexual immorality.<sup><a id="n6601713" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601713">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">17:5</span> On<sup><a id="n6601714" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601714">14</a></sup> her forehead was written a name, a mystery:<sup><a id="n6601715" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601715">15</a></sup> “Babylon the Great, the Mother of prostitutes and of the detestable things of the earth.” <span class="verse">17:6</span> I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the saints and the blood of those who testified to Jesus.<sup><a id="n6601716" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601716">16</a></sup> I<sup><a id="n6601717" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601717">17</a></sup> was greatly astounded<sup><a id="n6601718" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601718">18</a></sup> when I saw her. <span class="verse">17:7</span> But<sup><a id="n6601719" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601719">19</a></sup> the angel said to me, “Why are you astounded? I will interpret<sup><a id="n6601720" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601720">20</a></sup> for you the mystery of the woman and of the beast with the seven heads and ten horns that carries her. <span class="verse">17:8</span> The beast you saw was, and is not, but is about to come up from the abyss<sup><a id="n6601721" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601721">21</a></sup> and then go to destruction. The<sup><a id="n6601722" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601722">22</a></sup> inhabitants of the earth—all those whose names have not been written in the book of life since the foundation of the world—will be astounded when they see that<sup><a id="n6601723" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601723">23</a></sup> the beast was, and is not, but is to come. <span class="verse">17:9</span> (This requires<sup><a id="n6601724" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601724">24</a></sup> a mind that has wisdom.) The seven heads are seven mountains<sup><a id="n6601725" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601725">25</a></sup> the woman sits on. They are also seven kings: <span class="verse">17:10</span> five have fallen; one is,<sup><a id="n6601726" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601726">26</a></sup> and the other has not yet come, but whenever he does come, he must remain for only a brief time. <span class="verse">17:11</span> The<sup><a id="n6601727" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601727">27</a></sup> beast that was, and is not, is himself an eighth king and yet is one of the seven, and is going to destruction. <span class="verse">17:12</span> The<sup><a id="n6601728" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601728">28</a></sup> ten horns that you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but will receive ruling authority<sup><a id="n6601729" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601729">29</a></sup> as kings with the beast for one hour. <span class="verse">17:13</span> These kings<sup><a id="n6601730" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601730">30</a></sup> have a single intent, and they will give their power and authority to the beast. <span class="verse">17:14</span> They will make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb will conquer them, because he is Lord of lords and King of kings, and those accompanying<sup><a id="n6601731" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601731">31</a></sup> the Lamb are the called, chosen, and faithful.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:15</span> Then<sup><a id="n6601732" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601732">32</a></sup> the angel<sup><a id="n6601733" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601733">33</a></sup> said to me, “The waters you saw (where the prostitute is seated) are peoples, multitudes,<sup><a id="n6601734" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601734">34</a></sup> nations, and languages. <span class="verse">17:16</span> The<sup><a id="n6601735" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601735">35</a></sup> ten horns that you saw, and the beast—these will hate the prostitute and make her desolate and naked. They<sup><a id="n6601736" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601736">36</a></sup> will consume her flesh and burn her up with fire.<sup><a id="n6601737" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601737">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">17:17</span> For God has put into their minds<sup><a id="n6601738" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601738">38</a></sup> to carry out his purpose<sup><a id="n6601739" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601739">39</a></sup> by making<sup><a id="n6601740" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601740">40</a></sup> a decision<sup><a id="n6601741" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601741">41</a></sup> to give their royal power<sup><a id="n6601742" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601742">42</a></sup> to the beast until the words of God are fulfilled.<sup><a id="n6601743" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601743">43</a></sup> <span class="verse">17:18</span> As for<sup><a id="n6601744" href="file1250_notes.xhtml#n6601744">44</a></sup> the woman you saw, she is the great city that has sovereignty over the kings of the earth.” </p>

</body>
</html>