<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 10</h2>
<p id="n400101"><a href="file979.xhtml#n400101">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.”</p></p>
<p id="n400102"><a href="file979.xhtml#n400102">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Unclean spirits</i> refers to evil spirits.</p></p>
<p id="n400103"><a href="file979.xhtml#n400103">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “every [kind of] disease and every [kind of] sickness.” Here “every” was not repeated in the translation for stylistic reasons. The present translation, like several other translations (e.g., NASB, NKJV, CEV, NLT), has opted for “every kind of disease and sickness” here (KJV “all manner of sickness and all manner of disease”), understanding the Greek term <span class="greek">πᾶς</span> to refer to “everything belonging, in kind, to the class designated by the noun” (BDAG 784 s.v. 5).</p><p><b>sn</b> The same statement about healing was made concerning Jesus’ ministry in Matt 9:35, which likewise repeated Matt 4:23. By the choice of wording the evangelist thus links the ministry of the disciples with the ministry of Jesus himself.</p></p>
<p id="n400104"><a href="file979.xhtml#n400104">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>apostles</i> is rare in the gospels, found only here, Mark 3:14, and six more times in Luke (6:13; 9:10; 11:49; 17:5; 22:14; 24:10).</p></p>
<p id="n400105"><a href="file979.xhtml#n400105">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> In the various lists of the twelve, <i>Simon</i> (that is, Peter) is always mentioned first (see also Mark 3:16-19; Luke 6:13-16; Acts 1:13) and the first four individuals listed are always the same, although not in the same order following Peter.</p></p>
<p id="n400106"><a href="file979.xhtml#n400106">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Bartholomew</i> means “son of Tolmai” in Aramaic. It has frequently been suggested that this is another name for Nathanael mentioned in John 1:45, although this is not certain.</p></p>
<p id="n400107"><a href="file979.xhtml#n400107">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is the “doubting Thomas” mentioned in John 20:24-29.</p></p>
<p id="n400108"><a href="file979.xhtml#n400108">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>tax collectors</i> in 5:46.</p></p>
<p id="n400109"><a href="file979.xhtml#n400109">9</a> <p><b>tc</b> Witnesses differ on the identification of the last disciple mentioned in v. 3: He is called <span class="greek">Λεββαῖος</span> (<span class="translit">Lebbaios</span>, “Lebbaeus”) in D and <i>Judas Zelotes</i> in the Old Latin witnesses. The Byzantine text, along with a few others (C<sup>(</sup>*<sup>),2</sup> L N W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 565 579 700 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span>), conflates earlier readings by calling him “Lebbaeus, who was called Thaddaeus,” while codex 13 conflates by way of transposition (“Thaddaeus, who was called Lebbaeus”). But excellent and early witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B ƒ<sup>13</sup> 892 lat co) call him merely <span class="greek">Θαδδαῖος</span> (<span class="translit">Thaddaios</span>, “Thaddaeus”), a reading which, because of this support, is most likely correct. </p></p>
<p id="n4001010"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001010">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Cananean,” but according to both BDAG 507 s.v. <span class="greek">Καναναῖος</span> and L&amp;N 11.88, this term has no relation at all to the geographical terms for Cana or Canaan, but is derived from the Aramaic term for “<i>enthusiast, zealot</i>” (see Luke 6:15; Acts 1:13), possibly because of an earlier affiliation with the party of the Zealots (cf. TEV “Simon the Patriot”). He may not have been technically a member of the particular Jewish nationalistic party known as “Zealots” (since according to some scholars this party had not been organized at that time), but simply someone who was zealous for Jewish independence from Rome, in which case the term would refer to his temperament (cf. CEV “Simon, known as the Eager One”).</p></p>
<p id="n4001011"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001011">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> Just as Peter is always mentioned first in all the lists, <i>Judas Iscariot</i> is always mentioned last, presumably because he was considered unworthy. There is some debate about what the name <i>Iscariot</i> means. It probably alludes to a region in Judea and thus might make Judas the only non-Galilean in the group. Several explanations for the name <i>Iscariot</i> have been proposed, but it is probably transliterated Hebrew with the meaning “man of Kerioth” (there are at least two villages that had that name). For further discussion see D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> (BECNT), 1:546; also D. A. Carson, <i>John</i>, 304.</p></p>
<p id="n4001012"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001012">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who even betrayed him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001013"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001013">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “instructing them, saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001014"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001014">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on the way/road of the Gentiles.” The objective genitive “of the Gentiles” indicates the direction (BDAG 554 s.v. <span class="greek">ὁδός</span> 1.a); the restriction is on the territory to be visited rather than contact with individual Gentiles or Samaritans (compare the mission of the seventy-two in Luke 10:4 where even standard greetings along the road are prohibited).</p> <p><b>sn</b> Since Galilee was surrounded on all sides by Gentile territory except the south, where it bordered on Samaria, this restriction effectively limited the mission of the twelve to Galilee on this occasion.</p></p>
<p id="n4001015"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001015">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “town [or city] of the Samaritans.”</p><p><b>sn</b> This is the only mention of <i>Samaritans</i> or Samaria in the Gospel of Matthew.</p></p>
<p id="n4001016"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001016">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But go.” The Greek <span class="greek">μᾶλλον</span> (<span class="translit">mallon</span>, “rather, instead”) conveys the adversative nuance here so that <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001017"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001017">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> The imagery of <i>lost sheep</i> probably alludes to Jer 50:6, where the Jewish people have been abandoned by their leaders (“shepherds”) and allowed to go astray.</p></p>
<p id="n4001018"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001018">18</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of Byzantine minuscules, along with a few other witnesses (C<sup>3</sup> K L <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> 579 700<sup>txt</sup>* 1424<sup>c</sup> sa mae), lack <span class="greek">νεκροὺς ἐγείρετε</span> (<span class="translit">nekrous egeirete</span>, “raise the dead”), most likely because of oversight due to a string of similar endings (-<span class="greek">ετε</span> in the second person imperatives, occurring five times in v. 8). The longer version of this verse is found in several diverse and ancient witnesses such as <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C* (D) N 0281<sup>vid</sup> ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33 565 579<sup>mg</sup> lat bo; P W <span class="greek">Δ</span> 348 sy<sup>h</sup> have a word-order variation, but nevertheless include <span class="greek">νεκροὺς ἐγείρετε</span>. Although some Byzantine-text proponents charge the Alexandrian witnesses with theologically-motivated alterations toward heterodoxy, it is interesting to find a variant such as this in which the charge could be reversed (do the Byzantine scribes have something against the miracle of resurrection?). In reality, such charges of wholesale theologically-motivated changes toward heterodoxy are immediately suspect due to lack of evidence of <i>intentional</i> changes (here the change is evidently due to accidental omission).</p></p>
<p id="n4001019"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001019">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>leper</i> in Matt 8:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4001020"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001020">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>gold</i>, <i>silver</i>, and <i>copper</i> probably represent varying degrees of provision, with gold the most valuable and copper the least. Jesus’ point appears to be that not even minimal provision (<i>copper</i>) was to be taken along, forcing the disciple to be totally dependent on God.</p></p>
<p id="n4001021"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001021">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “no traveler’s bag”; or possibly “no beggar’s bag” (L&amp;N 6.145; BDAG 811 s.v. <span class="greek">πήρα</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4001022"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001022">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “two tunics,” that is, wearing one and carrying one as a spare. See the note on the word “tunic” in Matt 5:40.</p></p>
<p id="n4001023"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001023">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Mark 6:8 allows one staff. It is possible that Matthew’s “two” with regard to the tunics (NET “an extra tunic”) extends to cover the sandals and staff as well (although “staff” is singular), making this a summary (cf. Luke 9:3) meaning not taking an extra pair of sandals or an extra staff (like the tunics). It is also possible the expression is merely rhetorical for “traveling light” which has been rendered in two slightly different ways.</p><p><b>sn</b> The point of the prohibitions seems to be not so much urgency as total dependence on God. Lack of a <i>staff</i>, in particular, would leave the traveler extremely vulnerable to wild animals and robbers.</p></p>
<p id="n4001024"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001024">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001025"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001025">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Into whatever town or village you enter.” This acts as a distributive, meaning every town or village they enter; this is expressed more naturally in English as “whenever you enter a town or village.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001026"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001026">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in it” (referring to the city or village).</p></p>
<p id="n4001027"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001027">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “there.” This was translated as “with them” to avoid redundancy in English and to clarify where the disciples were to stay.</p><p><b>sn</b> Jesus telling his disciples to <i>stay with them</i> in one house contrasts with the practice of religious philosophers in the ancient world who went from house to house begging. Staying in one location would give the disciples a base of operations for mission in the area as long as they were there.</p></p>
<p id="n4001028"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001028">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “give it greetings.” The expression “give it greetings” is a metonymy; the “house” is put for those who live in it. The translation clarifies this because it sounds odd in contemporary English to speak of greeting a building.</p></p>
<p id="n4001029"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001029">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> The response to these messengers determines how God’s blessing is bestowed—if the messengers are not welcomed, their blessing will return to them. Jesus shows just how important their mission is by this remark.</p></p>
<p id="n4001030"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001030">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> To <i>shake the dust off</i> represented, on one level, shaking off the uncleanness from one’s feet; see Luke 10:11; Acts 13:51; 18:6. At another level, however, it is similar to a prophetic sign, representing the termination of all fellowship with those individuals or localities that have rejected the messengers along with their message of the coming kingdom of heaven. This in essence constitutes a sign of eschatological judgment, as confirmed in the following verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4001031"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001031">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001032"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001032">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Sodom and Gomorrah</i> were widely regarded as the most wicked of OT cities from the actions described in Gen 19:1-29; even in OT times their wickedness had become proverbial (Isa 1:9-10). The allusion to God’s judgment on these cities is not intended to indicate that they might be shown mercy on the day of judgment, but to warn that rejecting the messengers with their current message about the coming kingdom is even more serious than the worst sins of Sodom and Gomorrah and will result in even more severe punishment.</p></p>
<p id="n4001033"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001033">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold I.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4001034"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001034">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> This imagery of <i>wolves</i> is found in intertestamental Judaism (see <i>Pss. Sol</i>. 8:23, 30; also <i>1 Enoch</i> 89:55). For more on the <i>sheep</i> imagery see H. Preisker and S. Schulz, <i>TDNT</i> 6:690. The imagery of <i>sheep surrounded by wolves</i> suggests violence, and prepares the hearers for the persecutions of disciples described in vv. 17-26.</p></p>
<p id="n4001035"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001035">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> The craftiness of <i>serpents</i> is proverbial and can be traced as far back as Gen 3:1. As for how it applies to Jesus’ disciples sent out with the message of the coming kingdom, interpreters have been far less certain, and there is a great diversity of opinion.</p></p>
<p id="n4001036"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001036">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Doves</i> were regarded in both Greek and Jewish culture of the first century as symbols of purity, integrity, and harmlessness (see H. Greeven, <i>TDNT</i> 6:65-67).</p></p>
<p id="n4001037"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001037">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001038"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001038">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Councils</i> in this context has a non-technical sense referring to local judicial bodies (courts) attached to the Jewish synagogue (cf. BDAG 967 s.v. <span class="greek">συνέδριον</span> 1.a). These courts would be responsible for meting out justice and discipline within the Jewish community.</p></p>
<p id="n4001039"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001039">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and have you flogged” (a causative sense). BDAG 620 s.v. <span class="greek">μαστιγόω</span> 1.a states, “of flogging as a punishment decreed by the synagogue (Dt 25:2f; s. the Mishna Tractate Sanhedrin-Makkoth, edited w. notes by SKrauss ’33) w. acc. of pers. Mt 10:17; 23:34.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001040"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001040">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogues</i> in 4:23.</p></p>
<p id="n4001041"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001041">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> These statements look at persecution both from a Jewish context as the mention of <i>councils</i> and <i>synagogues</i> suggests, and from a Gentile one as the reference to <i>governors and kings</i> suggests. Some fulfillment of Jewish persecution can be seen in Acts 4:3; 5:17-18, 40-41; 6:12; 7:1-60; 8:1-3, and of Gentile persecution in Acts 25:2-12, 24-27.</p></p>
<p id="n4001042"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001042">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001043"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001043">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “hand you over into custody,” in particular “as a t.t. of police and courts ‘hand over into [the] custody [of]’” (BDAG 762 s.v. <span class="greek">παραδίδωμι</span> 1.b). In context some sort of trial is implied (cf. Luke 12:11).</p></p>
<p id="n4001044"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001044">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “how or what you might speak.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001045"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001045">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in that hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001046"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001046">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p><p><b>sn</b> The mention of <i>father</i> and <i>child</i> in the following clause indicates that <i>brother</i> here refers to actual siblings, the members of one’s own family.</p></p>
<p id="n4001047"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001047">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will rebel against.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001048"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001048">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001049"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001049">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">πόλις</span> (<span class="translit">polis</span>) can mean either “town” or “city” depending on the context (BDAG 844 s.v. 1, “population center of varying size, city, town”).</p></p>
<p id="n4001050"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001050">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>) I say to you.” Here <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>, “for”) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001051"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001051">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">πόλις</span> (<span class="translit">polis</span>), can mean either “town” or “city” (see previous note in this verse). “Town” was employed here to emphasize the large number of places to visit (not just the largest cities) and thus the extensive nature of the disciples’ ministry.</p></p>
<p id="n4001052"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001052">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 8:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4001054"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001054">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “will they call” are not in the Greek text but are implied, and have been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4001055"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001055">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Therefore do not.” Here <span class="greek">οὖν</span> (<span class="translit">oun</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001056"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001056">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “concealed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001057"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001057">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> The passive voice here and with the next verb is probably used for rhetorical effect. Although it is common to understand such usage, particularly in the gospels, as examples of the so-called “divine passive” where God is the unstated performer of the action, according to Wallace (<i>ExSyn</i> 438) this category is overused.</p><p><b>sn</b> The passive verbs <i>revealed</i> and <i>made known</i> suggest the revelation comes from God. The text is both a warning about bad things being revealed and an encouragement that good things will be made known.</p></p>
<p id="n4001058"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001058">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “what you hear in the ear,” an idiom meaning “say someth. into someone’s ear, i.e., secretly or in confidence, whisper” (BDAG 739 s.v. <span class="greek">οὖς</span> 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4001059"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001059">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression “proclaim from the housetops” is an idiom for proclaiming something publicly (L&amp;N 7.51; BDAG 266 s.v. <span class="greek">δῶμα</span>). Roofs of many first century Jewish houses in Judea and Galilee were flat and had access either from outside or from within the house. Something shouted from atop a house would be heard by everyone in the street below.</p></p>
<p id="n4001060"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001060">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001061"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001061">61</a> <p><b>sn</b> A similar exhortation is found in 4 Macc 13:14-15, reflecting the view of Judaism in the intertestamental period. The statement here assumes there is more to a person than a body. As J. Nolland states, “Fear of God is to displace fear of death-dealing persecutors. The stakes are higher with God” (<i>Matthew</i> [NIGTC], 436).</p></p>
<p id="n4001062"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001062">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> While <i>destroy</i> is sometimes taken to mean annihilation, it does not necessarily have to imply that here (“Of eternal death… Mt 10:28, ” BDAG 116 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπόλλυμι</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">α</span>). There are some Jewish intertestamental texts that appear to reflect a belief in everlasting punishment for the wicked (Jdt 16:17; 1QS 2:8) as well as Rev 14:11 in the NT. See also the note on the word <i>hell</i> in 5:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4001063"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001063">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>penny</i> refers to an assarion, a small Roman copper coin. One of them was worth one-sixteenth of a denarius or less than a half hour’s average wage. <i>Sparrows</i> were the cheapest items sold in the market. The point of Jesus’ statement is that God knows about even the most financially insignificant things; see Isa 49:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4001064"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001064">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the ground without the knowledge and consent of your Father.”</p><p><b>sn</b> This is a typical form of rabbinic argumentation, from the lesser to the greater: If God cares about the lesser thing (sparrows) how much more does he care about the greater thing (people).</p></p>
<p id="n4001065"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001065">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> This represents the third call by Jesus not to be <i>afraid</i> in the section (previously in vv. 26, 28). Since these two previous references were related to fear of persecution, it is probable that this one does as well. Once again the <i>sparrows</i> are mentioned and the argument is from lesser to greater (if God cares about individual hairs on the head and about sparrows, how much more does he care about people).</p></p>
<p id="n4001066"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001066">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “confesses”; cf. BDAG 708 s.v. <span class="greek">ὁμολογέω</span> 4, “to acknowledge someth., ordinarily in public, acknowledge, claim, profess, praise.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001067"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001067">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I will acknowledge [or, confess] him also.”</p><p><b>sn</b> This acknowledgment will take place at the judgment. On Jesus and judgment, see Luke 22:69; Acts 10:42-43; 17:31. </p></p>
<p id="n4001068"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001068">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “cast.” For <span class="greek">βάλλω</span> (<span class="translit">ballō</span>) in the sense of bringing about (or causing) a state or condition, see L&amp;N 13.14; BDAG 163-64 s.v. 4.</p></p>
<p id="n4001069"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001069">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> For rhetorical reasons, Jesus’ statement is deliberately paradoxical (seeming to state the opposite of Matt 10:13 where the messengers are to bring peace). The conflict implied by the <i>sword</i> is not primarily eschatological in this context, however, but immediate, and concerns the division and discord even among family members that a person’s allegiance to Jesus would bring (vv. 35-39).</p></p>
<p id="n4001070"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001070">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Matt 10:35-36 are an allusion to Mic 7:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4001071"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001071">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here “worthy” (<span class="greek">ἄξιος</span>, <i>axios</i>) means “does not deserve to belong to me” (BDAG 94 s.v. 2.a), i.e., “is not worthy to be my disciple” (cf. Luke 14:26) or perhaps “is not worthy to participate in the kingdom” (to be undeserving of Jesus is to be undeserving of the kingdom he brings).</p><p><b>sn</b> The statement demands uncompromising, radical loyalty to Jesus, a loyalty so powerful that it surpasses normal human relationships, even familial ones.</p></p>
<p id="n4001072"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001072">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> According to Plutarch, “Every criminal who is executed carries his own cross” (<i>De sera numinus vindicta</i> 9.554b). Jesus is speaking figuratively here in the context of rejection. If one’s allegiance to Jesus does not have absolute priority, then one will not follow him in the face of possible rejection and persecution.</p></p>
<p id="n4001073"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001073">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his soul.” The Greek <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) has many different meanings depending on the context. The two primary meanings here are the earthly life (animate life, sometimes called “physical life”) and the inner life (the life that transcends the earthly life, sometimes called “the soul”). The fact that the Greek term can have both meanings creates in this verse both a paradox and a wordplay. The desire to preserve both aspects of <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) for oneself creates the tension here (cf. BDAG 1099 s.v. 1.a; 2.d,e). Translation of the Greek term <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) presents a particularly difficult problem in this verse. Most English versions since the KJV have translated the term “life.” This preserves the paradox of finding one’s “life” (in the sense of earthly life) while at the same time really losing it (in the sense of “soul” or transcendent inner life) and vice versa, but at the same time it obscures the wordplay that results from the same Greek word having multiple meanings. To translate as “soul,” however, gives the modern English reader the impression of the immortal soul at the expense of the earthly life. On the whole it is probably best to use the translation “life” and retain the paradox at the expense of the wordplay.</p></p>
<p id="n4001074"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001074">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek word translated <i>life</i> can refer to both earthly, physical life and inner, transcendent life (one’s “soul”). In the context, if a person is not willing to suffer the world’s rejection and persecution in order to follow Jesus but instead seeks to retain his physical life, then that person will <i>lose</i> both physical life and inner, transcendent life (at the judgment). On the other hand, the one who willingly gives up earthly, physical life to follow Jesus (“loses his life because of me”) will ultimately <i>find</i> one’s “soul” (note that the parallel in John’s Gospel speaks of “guarding one’s ‘soul’ for eternal life” (John 12:25).</p></p>
<p id="n4001075"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001075">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for my sake.” The traditional rendering “for my sake” can be understood in the sense of “for my benefit,” but the Greek term <span class="greek">ἕνεκα</span> (<i>heneka</i>) indicates the cause or reason for something (BDAG 334 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4001076"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001076">76</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The one who sent me</i> refers to God. Reception of the messengers (and by implication, the message they bring) is equivalent to reception of both Jesus and God the Father himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4001077"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001077">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And whoever.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001078"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001078">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> Mention of <i>these little ones</i> in the context seems slightly odd since Jesus is addressing disciples, and this seems to refer to disciples. Probably it is another reference to the itinerant messengers mentioned previously (v. 40). Even a minimal act of kindness shown to one of these (<i>a cup of cold water</i>) will not go unacknowledged and unrewarded.</p></p>
<p id="n4001079"><a href="file979.xhtml#n4001079">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
