<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Breaking Human Traditions</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> Then Pharisees<sup><a id="n400151" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n400151">1</a></sup> and experts in the law<sup><a id="n400152" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n400152">2</a></sup> came from Jerusalem to Jesus and said,<sup><a id="n400154" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n400154">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:2</span> “Why do your disciples disobey the tradition of the elders? For they don’t wash their<sup><a id="n400155" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n400155">5</a></sup> hands when they eat.”<sup><a id="n400156" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n400156">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:3</span> He answered them,<sup><a id="n400157" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n400157">7</a></sup> “And why do you disobey the commandment of God because of your tradition? <span class="verse">15:4</span> For God said,<sup><a id="n400158" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n400158">8</a></sup> ‘<b><i>Honor your father and mother</i></b>’<sup><a id="n400159" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n400159">9</a></sup> and ‘<b><i>Whoever insults his father or mother must be put to death</i></b>.’<sup><a id="n4001510" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001510">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:5</span> But you say, ‘If someone tells his father or mother, “Whatever help you would have received from me is given to God,”<sup><a id="n4001511" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001511">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:6</span> he does not need to honor his father.’<sup><a id="n4001512" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001512">12</a></sup> You have nullified the word of God on account of your tradition. <span class="verse">15:7</span> Hypocrites! Isaiah prophesied correctly about you when he said, </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">15:8</span> ‘<b><i>This people honors me with their lips,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>but their heart</i></b><sup><a id="n4001513" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001513">13</a></sup> <b><i>is far from me,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">15:9</span> <b><i>and they worship me in vain,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>teaching as doctrines the commandments of men</b></i>.’”<sup><a id="n4001514" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001514">14</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">True Defilement</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:10</span> Then he called the crowd to him and said,<sup><a id="n4001515" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001515">15</a></sup> “Listen and understand. <span class="verse">15:11</span> What defiles a person is not what goes into the mouth; it is what<sup><a id="n4001516" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001516">16</a></sup> comes out of the mouth that defiles a person.” <span class="verse">15:12</span> Then the disciples came to him and said, “Do you know that when the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4001517" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001517">17</a></sup> heard this saying they were offended?” <span class="verse">15:13</span> And he replied,<sup><a id="n4001518" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001518">18</a></sup> “Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant will be uprooted. <span class="verse">15:14</span> Leave them! They are blind guides.<sup><a id="n4001519" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001519">19</a></sup> If someone who is blind leads another who is blind,<sup><a id="n4001520" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001520">20</a></sup> both will fall into a pit.” <span class="verse">15:15</span> But Peter<sup><a id="n4001521" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001521">21</a></sup> said to him, “Explain this parable to us.” <span class="verse">15:16</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4001522" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001522">22</a></sup> said, “Even after all this, are you still so foolish? <span class="verse">15:17</span> Don’t you understand that whatever goes into the mouth enters the stomach and then passes out into the sewer?<sup><a id="n4001523" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001523">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:18</span> But the things that come out of the mouth come from the heart, and these things defile a person. <span class="verse">15:19</span> For out of the heart come evil ideas, murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false testimony, slander. <span class="verse">15:20</span> These are the things that defile a person; it is not eating with unwashed hands that defiles a person.”<sup><a id="n4001524" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001524">24</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Canaanite Woman’s Faith</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:21</span> After going out from there, Jesus went to the region of Tyre and Sidon. <span class="verse">15:22</span> A<sup><a id="n4001527" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001527">27</a></sup> Canaanite woman from that area came<sup><a id="n4001528" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001528">28</a></sup> and cried out,<sup><a id="n4001529" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001529">29</a></sup> “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David! My daughter is horribly demon-possessed!” <span class="verse">15:23</span> But he did not answer her a word. Then<sup><a id="n4001530" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001530">30</a></sup> his disciples came and begged him,<sup><a id="n4001531" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001531">31</a></sup> “Send her away, because she keeps on crying out after us.” <span class="verse">15:24</span> So<sup><a id="n4001532" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001532">32</a></sup> he answered, “I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” <span class="verse">15:25</span> But she came and bowed down<sup><a id="n4001533" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001533">33</a></sup> before him and said,<sup><a id="n4001534" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001534">34</a></sup> “Lord, help me!” <span class="verse">15:26</span> “It is not right<sup><a id="n4001535" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001535">35</a></sup> to take the children’s bread and throw it to the dogs,”<sup><a id="n4001536" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001536">36</a></sup> he said.<sup><a id="n4001537" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001537">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:27</span> “Yes, Lord,” she replied,<sup><a id="n4001538" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001538">38</a></sup> “but even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table.” <span class="verse">15:28</span> Then<sup><a id="n4001539" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001539">39</a></sup> Jesus answered her, “Woman,<sup><a id="n4001540" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001540">40</a></sup> your faith is great! Let what you want be done for you.” And her daughter was healed from that hour. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing Many Others </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:29</span> When he left there, Jesus went along the Sea of Galilee. Then he went up a mountain, where he sat down. <span class="verse">15:30</span> Then<sup><a id="n4001541" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001541">41</a></sup> large crowds came to him bringing with them the lame, blind, crippled, mute, and many others. They<sup><a id="n4001542" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001542">42</a></sup> laid them at his feet, and he healed them. <span class="verse">15:31</span> As a result, the crowd was amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the crippled healthy, the lame walking, and the blind seeing, and they praised the God of Israel. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feeding of the Four Thousand</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:32</span> Then Jesus called his disciples and said, “I have compassion on the crowd, because they have already been here with me three days and they have nothing to eat. I don’t want to send them away hungry since they may faint on the way.” <span class="verse">15:33</span> The disciples said to him, “Where can we get enough bread in this desolate place to satisfy so great a crowd?” <span class="verse">15:34</span> Jesus said to them, “How many loaves do you have?” They replied, “Seven—and a few small fish.” <span class="verse">15:35</span> After instructing the crowd to sit down on the ground, <span class="verse">15:36</span> he took the seven loaves and the fish, and after giving thanks, he broke them and began giving them to the disciples, who then gave them to the crowds.<sup><a id="n4001543" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001543">43</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:37</span> They<sup><a id="n4001544" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001544">44</a></sup> all ate and were satisfied, and they picked up the broken pieces left over, seven baskets full. <span class="verse">15:38</span> Not counting children and women,<sup><a id="n4001545" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001545">45</a></sup> there were 4,000 men who ate.<sup><a id="n4001546" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001546">46</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:39</span> After sending away the crowd, he got into the boat<sup><a id="n4001547" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001547">47</a></sup> and went to the region of Magadan.<sup><a id="n4001548" href="file984_notes.xhtml#n4001548">48</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>