<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Ephesians 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ephesians<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">New Life Individually</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> And although you were<sup><a id="n490021" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n490021">1</a></sup> dead<sup><a id="n490022" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n490022">2</a></sup> in your offenses and sins, <span class="verse">2:2</span> in which<sup><a id="n490023" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n490023">3</a></sup> you formerly lived<sup><a id="n490024" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n490024">4</a></sup> according to this world’s present path,<sup><a id="n490025" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n490025">5</a></sup>  according to the ruler of the domain<sup><a id="n490026" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n490026">6</a></sup> of the air, the ruler of<sup><a id="n490027" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n490027">7</a></sup> the spirit<sup><a id="n490028" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n490028">8</a></sup> that is now energizing<sup><a id="n490029" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n490029">9</a></sup> the sons of disobedience,<sup><a id="n4900210" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900210">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:3</span> among whom<sup><a id="n4900211" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900211">11</a></sup> all of us<sup><a id="n4900212" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900212">12</a></sup> also<sup><a id="n4900213" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900213">13</a></sup> formerly lived out our lives in the cravings of our flesh, indulging the desires of the flesh and the mind, and were by nature children of wrath<sup><a id="n4900214" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900214">14</a></sup> even as the rest…<sup><a id="n4900215" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900215">15</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:4</span> But God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love with which he loved us, <span class="verse">2:5</span> even though we were dead in offenses, made us alive together with Christ—by grace you are saved!<sup><a id="n4900216" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900216">16</a></sup> — <span class="verse">2:6</span> and he raised us up together with him and seated us together with him in the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus, <span class="verse">2:7</span> to demonstrate in the coming ages<sup><a id="n4900217" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900217">17</a></sup> the surpassing wealth of his grace in kindness toward<sup><a id="n4900218" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900218">18</a></sup> us in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">2:8</span> For by grace you are saved<sup><a id="n4900219" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900219">19</a></sup> through faith,<sup><a id="n4900220" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900220">20</a></sup> and this is not from yourselves, it is the gift of God; <span class="verse">2:9</span> it is not from<sup><a id="n4900221" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900221">21</a></sup> works, so that no one can boast.<sup><a id="n4900222" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900222">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:10</span> For we are his creative work, having been created in Christ Jesus for good works that God prepared beforehand so we can do them.<sup><a id="n4900223" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900223">23</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">New Life Corporately</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:11</span> Therefore remember that formerly you, the Gentiles in the flesh—who are called “uncircumcision” by the so-called “circumcision” that is performed on the body<sup><a id="n4900224" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900224">24</a></sup> by human hands— <span class="verse">2:12</span> that you were at that time without the Messiah,<sup><a id="n4900225" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900225">25</a></sup> alienated from the citizenship of Israel and strangers to the covenants of promise,<sup><a id="n4900226" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900226">26</a></sup> having no hope and without God in the world. <span class="verse">2:13</span> But now in Christ Jesus you who used to be far away have been brought near by the blood of Christ.<sup><a id="n4900227" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900227">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:14</span> For he is our peace, the one who made both groups into one<sup><a id="n4900228" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900228">28</a></sup> and who destroyed the middle wall of partition, the hostility, <span class="verse">2:15</span> when he nullified<sup><a id="n4900229" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900229">29</a></sup> in his flesh the law of commandments in decrees. He did this to create in himself one new man<sup><a id="n4900230" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900230">30</a></sup> out of two,<sup><a id="n4900231" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900231">31</a></sup> thus making peace, <span class="verse">2:16</span> and to reconcile them both in one body to God through the cross, by which the hostility has been killed.<sup><a id="n4900232" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900232">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:17</span> And he came and preached peace to you who were far off and peace to those who were near, <span class="verse">2:18</span> so that<sup><a id="n4900233" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900233">33</a></sup> through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father. <span class="verse">2:19</span> So then you are no longer foreigners and noncitizens, but you are fellow citizens with the saints and members of God’s household, <span class="verse">2:20</span> because you have been built<sup><a id="n4900234" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900234">34</a></sup> on the foundation of the apostles and prophets,<sup><a id="n4900235" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900235">35</a></sup> with Christ Jesus himself as<sup><a id="n4900236" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900236">36</a></sup> the cornerstone.<sup><a id="n4900237" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900237">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:21</span> In him<sup><a id="n4900238" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900238">38</a></sup> the whole building,<sup><a id="n4900239" href="file1148_notes.xhtml#n4900239">39</a></sup> being joined together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord, <span class="verse">2:22</span> in whom you also are being built together into a dwelling place of God in the Spirit. </p>

</body>
</html>