<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 19</h2>
<p id="n400191"><a href="file988.xhtml#n400191">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it happened when.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400192"><a href="file988.xhtml#n400192">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> “River” is not in the Greek text but is supplied for clarity. The region referred to here is sometimes known as Transjordan (i.e., “across the Jordan”).</p></p>
<p id="n400193"><a href="file988.xhtml#n400193">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Pharisees.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n400194"><a href="file988.xhtml#n400194">4</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have either <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπῳ</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpō</span>, “for a man” [so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>3</sup> C D W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> 087 ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33 1241 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt]) <span class="greek">τινί</span> (<i>tini</i>, “for someone” 700), <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπῳ τινί</span> (<i>anthrōpō tini</i>, “for a man” [565]) or <span class="greek">ἀνδρί</span> (<span class="translit">andri</span>, “for a husband” [1424<sup>c</sup>]) before the infinitive <span class="greek">ἀπολῦσαι</span> (<span class="translit">apolusai</span>, “to divorce”). “For a husband” is an assimilation to the parallel in Mark; the other readings may have been motivated by the clarification needed (especially to give the following <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> [<span class="translit">autou</span>, “his”] an antecedent). But a few significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B L <span class="greek">Γ</span> 579 1424*) have neither noun or the pronoun. In light of the variety of additions that clarify the subject of the infinitive, and especially since the shorter reading is the more difficult, it is likely that none of these additions was present in the autograph. As the harder reading, the shorter reading seems to best explain the rise of the others. NA<sup>28</sup>, however, reads <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπῳ</span> here.</p></p>
<p id="n400195"><a href="file988.xhtml#n400195">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The question of the Pharisees was anything but sincere; they were asking it <i>to test him</i>. Jesus was now in the jurisdiction of Herod Antipas (i.e., Judea and beyond the Jordan) and it is likely that the Pharisees were hoping he might answer the question of divorce in a way similar to John the Baptist and so suffer the same fate as John, i.e., death at the hands of Herod (cf. 14:1-12). Jesus answered the question not on the basis of rabbinic custom and the debate over Deut 24:1, but rather from the account of creation and God’s original design.</p></p>
<p id="n400196"><a href="file988.xhtml#n400196">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 1:27; 5:2.</p></p>
<p id="n400197"><a href="file988.xhtml#n400197">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 2:24.</p></p>
<p id="n400198"><a href="file988.xhtml#n400198">8</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Although the majority of witnesses (B C N W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 078 087 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 565 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy<sup>p,h</sup>) have <span class="greek">αὐτήν</span> (<span class="translit">autēn</span>, “her”) after the infinitive <span class="greek">ἀπολῦσαι</span> (<span class="translit">apolusai</span>, “to divorce”), several authorities lack the <span class="greek">αὐτήν</span>. This shorter reading may be due to assimilation to the Markan parallel, but since it is attested in early and diverse witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> D L Z <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 579 700 lat) and since the parallel verse (Mark 10:4) already departs at many points, the shorter reading seems more likely to be initial text’s wording here. The pronoun has been included in the translation, however, for clarity. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating reservations about its authenticity.</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 24:1. The Pharisees were all in agreement that the OT permitted a man to write <i>a certificate of dismissal and to divorce</i> his wife (not vice-versa) and that remarriage was therefore sanctioned. But the two rabbinic schools of Shammai and Hillel differed on the grounds for divorce. Shammai was much stricter than Hillel and permitted divorce only in the case of sexual immorality. Hillel permitted divorce for almost any reason (cf. the Mishnah, <i>m. Gittin</i> 9.10).</p></p>
<p id="n400199"><a href="file988.xhtml#n400199">9</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few significant witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> <span class="greek">Φ</span> a b c mae) have the name “Jesus” here, but it is almost certainly not original. Nevertheless, for clarity’s sake, “Jesus” is added in the translation.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. </p></p>
<p id="n4001910"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “heart” (a collective singular).</p></p>
<p id="n4001911"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001911">11</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Some significant witnesses, along with the majority of later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>25</sup> C D L N W Z <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 078 ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy sa<sup>mss</sup> bo), read <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">autou</span>, “his”) after <span class="greek">μαθηταί</span> (<span class="translit">mathētai</span>, “disciples”), but this looks to be a clarifying reading. Other early and significant witnesses lack the pronoun (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>71vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B <span class="greek">Θ</span> e ff<sup>1</sup> g<sup>1</sup> sa<sup>ms</sup> mae; SBL), the reading adopted here. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the pronoun in brackets, indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4001912"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001912">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001913"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001913">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the womb of the mother” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4001914"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001914">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">εὐνουχίζω</span> occurs twice in this verse, translated the first time as “made eunuchs” and the second time as “became eunuchs.” The term literally refers to castration. The second occurrence of the word in this verse is most likely figurative, though, referring to those who willingly maintain a life of celibacy for the furtherance of the kingdom (see W. D. Davies and D. C. Allison, <i>Matthew</i> [ICC], 3:23).</p></p>
<p id="n4001915"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001915">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “people.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001916"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001916">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that he would lay his hands on them and pray.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001917"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the disciples scolded them.” In the translation the referent has been specified as “those who brought them,” since otherwise the statement could be understood to mean that the disciples scolded the children rather than their parents who brought them.</p></p>
<p id="n4001918"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001918">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these</i>. Children are a picture of those whose simple trust illustrates what faith is all about. The remark illustrates how everyone is important to God, even those whom others regard as insignificant.</p></p>
<p id="n4001919"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “went from there.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001920"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001920">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold one came.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1). Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4001921"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001921">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here the questioner asks how to <i>gain eternal life</i>. In several places Matthew uses “life” or “eternal life” in proximity with “the kingdom of heaven” or merely “the kingdom,” suggesting a close relationship between the two concepts (compare Matt 25:34 with v. 46; Matt 19:16, 17, 29 with vv. 23, 24). Matthew consistently portrays “eternal life” as something a person enters in the world to come, whereas the Gospel of John sees “eternal life” as beginning in the present and continuing into the future (cf. John 5:24).</p></p>
<p id="n4001922"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001922">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 20:12-16; Deut 5:16-20.</p></p>
<p id="n4001923"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001923">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 19:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4001924"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001924">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “kept.” The implication of this verb is that the man has obeyed the commandments without fail, so the adverb “wholeheartedly” has been added to the translation to bring out this nuance.</p></p>
<p id="n4001925"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001925">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these things.” The referent of the pronoun (the laws mentioned by Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> While the rich man was probably being sincere when he insisted <i>I have wholeheartedly obeyed all these laws</i>, he had confined his righteousness to external obedience. The rich man’s response to Jesus’ command—to give away all he had—revealed that internally he loved money more than God.</p></p>
<p id="n4001926"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001926">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the money” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4001927"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001927">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> The call for sacrifice comes with a promise of eternal reward: <i>You will have treasure in heaven</i>. Jesus’ call is a test to see how responsive the man is to God’s direction through him. Will he walk the path God’s agent calls him to walk? For a rich person who got it right, see Zacchaeus in Luke 19:1-10.</p></p>
<p id="n4001928"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001928">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he had many possessions.” This term (<span class="greek">κτῆμα</span>, <span class="translit">ktēma</span>) is often used for land as a possession.</p></p>
<p id="n4001929"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001929">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001930"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001930">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001931"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001931">31</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few, mostly late, witnesses (579 1424 <i>al</i> arm Cyr) read <span class="greek">κάμιλον</span> (<span class="translit">kamilon</span>, “rope”) for <span class="greek">κάμηλον</span> (<span class="translit">kamēlon</span>, “camel”), either through accidental misreading of the text or intentionally so as to soften Jesus’ words.</p></p>
<p id="n4001932"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001932">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>eye of a needle</i> refers to a sewing needle. (Although the story of a small gate in Jerusalem known as “The Needle’s Eye” has been widely circulated and may go back as far as the middle ages, there is no evidence that such a gate ever existed.) Jesus was saying rhetorically that it is impossible for a rich person to enter God’s kingdom, unless God (v. 26) intervenes.</p></p>
<p id="n4001933"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001933">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001934"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001934">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> The assumption is that the rich are blessed, so if they risk exclusion, who is left to <i>be saved</i>?</p></p>
<p id="n4001935"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001935">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001936"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001936">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἄνθρωποις</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpois</span>) is used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women (cf. NASB 1995 update, “people”). Because of the contrast here between mere mortals and God (“impossible for <i>men</i>, but for <i>God</i> all things are possible”) the phrase “mere humans” has been used in the translation. There may also be a slight wordplay with “the Son of Man” in v. 28.</p></p>
<p id="n4001937"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001937">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then answering, Peter said.” This construction is somewhat redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4001938"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001938">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> Peter wants reassurance that the disciples’ response and sacrifice have been noticed.</p></p>
<p id="n4001939"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001939">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “We have left everything and followed you.” Koine Greek often used paratactic structure when hypotactic was implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4001940"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001940">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001941"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001941">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001942"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001942">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek term translated <i>the age when all things are renewed</i> (<span class="greek">παλιγγενεσία</span>, <span class="translit">palingenesia</span>) is understood as a reference to the Messianic age, the time when all things are renewed and restored (cf. Rev 21:5).</p></p>
<p id="n4001943"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001943">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> The statement <i>you…will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel</i> looks at the future authority the Twelve will have when Jesus returns. They will share in Israel’s judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n4001944"><a href="file988.xhtml#n4001944">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus reassures his disciples with a promise that (1) much benefit in this life (<i>a hundred times as much</i>) and (2) <i>eternal life</i> will be given.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
