<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Beatitudes</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> When<sup><a id="n400051" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n400051">1</a></sup> he saw the crowds, he went up the mountain.<sup><a id="n400052" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n400052">2</a></sup> After he sat down his disciples came to him. <span class="verse">5:2</span> Then<sup><a id="n400053" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n400053">3</a></sup> he began to teach<sup><a id="n400054" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n400054">4</a></sup> them by saying: </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:3</span> “Blessed<sup><a id="n400055" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n400055">5</a></sup> are the poor in spirit,<sup><a id="n400056" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n400056">6</a></sup> for the kingdom of heaven belongs<sup><a id="n400057" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n400057">7</a></sup> to them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:4</span> “Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.<sup><a id="n400058" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n400058">8</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:5</span> “Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:6</span> “Blessed are those who hunger<sup><a id="n400059" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n400059">9</a></sup> and thirst for righteousness, for they will be satisfied. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:7</span> “Blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:8</span> “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:9</span> “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called the children<sup><a id="n4000510" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000510">10</a></sup> of God. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:10</span> “Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to them. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">5:11</span> “Blessed are you when people<sup><a id="n4000511" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000511">11</a></sup> insult you and persecute you and say all kinds of evil things about you falsely<sup><a id="n4000512" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000512">12</a></sup> on account of me. <span class="verse">5:12</span> Rejoice and be glad, because your reward is great in heaven, for they persecuted the prophets before you in the same way. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salt and Light</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:13</span> “You are the salt<sup><a id="n4000513" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000513">13</a></sup> of the earth. But if salt loses its flavor,<sup><a id="n4000514" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000514">14</a></sup> how can it be made salty again? It is no longer good for anything except to be thrown out and trampled on by people! <span class="verse">5:14</span> You are the light of the world. A city located on a hill cannot be hidden. <span class="verse">5:15</span> People<sup><a id="n4000515" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000515">15</a></sup> do not light a lamp and put it under a basket<sup><a id="n4000516" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000516">16</a></sup> but on a lampstand, and it gives light to all in the house. <span class="verse">5:16</span> In the same way, let your light shine before people, so that they can see your good deeds and give honor to your Father in heaven. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Fulfillment of the Law and Prophets </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:17</span> “Do not think that I have come to abolish the law or the prophets. I have not come to abolish these things but to fulfill them.<sup><a id="n4000517" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000517">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:18</span> I<sup><a id="n4000518" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000518">18</a></sup> tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4000519" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000519">19</a></sup> until heaven and earth pass away not the smallest letter or stroke of a letter<sup><a id="n4000520" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000520">20</a></sup> will pass from the law until everything takes place. <span class="verse">5:19</span> So anyone who breaks one of the least of these commands and teaches others<sup><a id="n4000521" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000521">21</a></sup> to do so will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever obeys them and teaches others to do so will be called great in the kingdom of heaven. <span class="verse">5:20</span> For I tell you, unless your righteousness goes beyond that of the experts in the law<sup><a id="n4000522" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000522">22</a></sup> and the Pharisees,<sup><a id="n4000523" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000523">23</a></sup> you will never enter the kingdom of heaven! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Anger and Murder </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:21</span> “You have heard that it was said to an older generation,<sup><a id="n4000524" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000524">24</a></sup> ‘<b><i>Do not murder</i></b>,’<sup><a id="n4000525" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000525">25</a></sup> and ‘whoever murders will be subjected to judgment.’<sup><a id="n4000526" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000526">26</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:22</span> But I say to you that anyone who is angry with a brother<sup><a id="n4000527" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000527">27</a></sup> will be subjected to judgment. And whoever insults<sup><a id="n4000528" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000528">28</a></sup> a brother will be brought before<sup><a id="n4000529" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000529">29</a></sup> the council,<sup><a id="n4000530" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000530">30</a></sup> and whoever says ‘Fool’<sup><a id="n4000531" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000531">31</a></sup> will be sent<sup><a id="n4000532" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000532">32</a></sup> to fiery hell.<sup><a id="n4000533" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000533">33</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:23</span> So then, if you bring your gift to the altar and there you remember that your brother has something against you, <span class="verse">5:24</span> leave your gift there in front of the altar. First go and be reconciled to your brother and then come and present your gift. <span class="verse">5:25</span> Reach agreement<sup><a id="n4000534" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000534">34</a></sup> quickly with your accuser while on the way to court,<sup><a id="n4000535" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000535">35</a></sup> or he<sup><a id="n4000536" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000536">36</a></sup> may hand you over to the judge, and the judge hand you over to the warden, and you will be thrown into prison. <span class="verse">5:26</span> I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4000537" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000537">37</a></sup> you will never get out of there until you have paid the last penny!<sup><a id="n4000538" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000538">38</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Adultery </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:27</span> “You have heard that it was said, ‘<b><i>Do not commit adultery</i></b>.’<sup><a id="n4000539" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000539">39</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:28</span> But I say to you that whoever looks at a woman to desire her has already committed adultery with her in his heart. <span class="verse">5:29</span> If your right eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away! It is better to lose one of your members than to have your whole body thrown into hell.<sup><a id="n4000540" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000540">40</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:30</span> If your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away! It is better to lose one of your members than to have your whole body go into hell. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Divorce</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:31</span> “It was said, ‘<b><i>Whoever divorces his wife must give her a legal document</i></b>.’<sup><a id="n4000541" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000541">41</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:32</span> But I say to you that everyone who divorces his wife, except for immorality,<sup><a id="n4000542" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000542">42</a></sup> makes her commit adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Oaths</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:33</span> “Again, you have heard that it was said to an older generation,<sup><a id="n4000543" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000543">43</a></sup> ‘<b><i>Do not break an oath, but fulfill your vows to the Lord</i></b>.’<sup><a id="n4000544" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000544">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:34</span> But I say to you, do not take oaths at all—not by heaven, because it is the throne of God, <span class="verse">5:35</span> not by earth, because it is his footstool, and not by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King.<sup><a id="n4000546" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000546">46</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:36</span> Do not take an oath by your head, because you are not able to make one hair white or black. <span class="verse">5:37</span> Let your word be ‘Yes, yes’ or ‘No, no.’ More than this is from the evil one.<sup><a id="n4000547" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000547">47</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Retaliation </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:38</span> “You have heard that it was said, ‘<b><i>An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth</i></b>.’<sup><a id="n4000548" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000548">48</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:39</span> But I say to you, do not resist the evildoer.<sup><a id="n4000549" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000549">49</a></sup> But whoever strikes you on the<sup><a id="n4000550" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000550">50</a></sup> right cheek, turn the other to him as well. <span class="verse">5:40</span> And if someone wants to sue you and take your tunic,<sup><a id="n4000551" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000551">51</a></sup> let him have your coat also. <span class="verse">5:41</span> And if anyone forces you to go one mile,<sup><a id="n4000552" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000552">52</a></sup> go with him two. <span class="verse">5:42</span> Give to the one who asks you,<sup><a id="n4000553" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000553">53</a></sup> and do not reject<sup><a id="n4000554" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000554">54</a></sup> the one who wants to borrow from you. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Love for Enemies </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:43</span> “You have heard that it was said, ‘<b><i>Love your neighbor</i></b>’<sup><a id="n4000555" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000555">55</a></sup> and ‘hate your enemy.’<sup><a id="n4000556" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000556">56</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:44</span> But I say to you, love your enemy and<sup><a id="n4000557" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000557">57</a></sup> pray for those who persecute you, <span class="verse">5:45</span> so that you may be like<sup><a id="n4000558" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000558">58</a></sup> your Father in heaven, since he causes the sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. <span class="verse">5:46</span> For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Even the tax collectors<sup><a id="n4000559" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000559">59</a></sup> do the same, don’t they? <span class="verse">5:47</span> And if you only greet your brothers, what more do you do? Even the Gentiles do the same, don’t they? <span class="verse">5:48</span> So then, be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.<sup><a id="n4000560" href="file974_notes.xhtml#n4000560">60</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>