<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 22</h2>
<p id="n660221"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n660221">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660222"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n660222">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the angel mentioned in 21:9, 15) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n660223"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n660223">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “proceeding.” Water is more naturally thought to pour out or flow out in English idiom.</p></p>
<p id="n660224"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n660224">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “its”; the referent (the city, the new Jerusalem) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n660225"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n660225">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">πλατεῖα</span> (<span class="translit">plateia</span>) refers to a major (broad) street (L&amp;N 1.103).</p></p>
<p id="n660226"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n660226">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “From here and from there.”</p></p>
<p id="n660227"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n660227">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “twelve crops” (one for each month of the year).</p></p>
<p id="n660228"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n660228">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “of the year” are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n660229"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n660229">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “be anything accursed” (L&amp;N 33.474).</p></p>
<p id="n6602210"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in it”; the referent (the city, the new Jerusalem) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6602211"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “city, and his.” Although this is a continuation of the previous sentence in Greek, a new sentence was started here in the translation because of the introduction of the Lamb’s followers.</p></p>
<p id="n6602212"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6602213"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will serve.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602214"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6602215"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the angel mentioned in 21:9, 15; 22:1) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6602216"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “faithful.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602217"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6602218"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602218">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> These lines are parenthetical, forming an aside to the narrative. The speaker here is the Lord Jesus Christ himself rather than the narrator.</p></p>
<p id="n6602219"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I am John, the one who heard and saw these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602220"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The pronoun “them” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6602221"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I fell down and worshiped at the feet.” BDAG 815 s.v. <span class="greek">πίπτω</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span>. has “<i>fall down, throw oneself to the ground</i> as a sign of devotion or humility, before high-ranking persons or divine beings.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602222"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present here.</p></p>
<p id="n6602223"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the elliptical expression <span class="greek">ὅρα μή</span> (<span class="translit">hora mē</span>) BDAG 720 s.v. <span class="greek">ὁράω</span> B.2 states: “Elliptically…<span class="greek">ὅρα μή</span> (sc. <span class="greek">ποιήσῃς</span>) <i>watch out! don’t do that!</i> Rv 19:10; 22:9.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602224"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fellow slave.” Though <span class="greek">σύνδουλος</span> (<span class="translit">sundoulos</span>) is here translated “fellow servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6602225"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “keep” (an idiom for obedience).</p></p>
<p id="n6602226"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6602227"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “must do evil still.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602228"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> For this translation see L&amp;N 88.258; the term refers to living in moral filth.</p></p>
<p id="n6602229"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “filthy, and the.” This is a continuation of the previous sentence in Greek, but because of the length and complexity of the construction a new sentence was started in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6602230"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term may be translated either “pay” or “pay back” and has something of a double meaning here. However, because of the mention of “wages” (“reward,” another wordplay with two meanings) in the previous clause, the translation “pay” for <span class="greek">ἀποδοῦναι</span> (<span class="translit">apodounai</span>) was used here.</p></p>
<p id="n6602231"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602231">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> These lines are parenthetical, forming an aside to the narrative. The speaker here is the Lord Jesus Christ himself rather than the narrator.</p></p>
<p id="n6602232"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that there will be to them authority over the tree of life.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602233"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">φάρμακοι</span> (<span class="translit">pharmakoi</span>) see L&amp;N 53.101.</p></p>
<p id="n6602234"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “lying,” “deceit.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602235"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this expression BDAG 892 s.v. <span class="greek">πρωϊνός</span> states, “<i>early, belonging to the morning</i> <span class="greek">ὁ ἀστὴρ ὁ πρ</span>. <i>the morning star,</i> Venus Rv 2:28; 22:16.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602236"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “written.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602237"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602237">37</a> <p><b>tc</b> The <i>Textus Receptus</i>, on which the KJV rests, reads “the book” of life (<span class="greek">ἀπὸ βίβλου</span>, <span class="translit">apo biblou</span>) instead of “the tree” of life. When the Dutch humanist Desiderius Erasmus translated the NT he had access to no Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span> for the last six verses of Revelation. So he translated the Latin Vulgate back into Greek at this point. As a result he created seventeen textual variants which were not in any Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span>. The most notorious of these is this reading. It is thus decidedly inauthentic, while “the tree” of life, found in the best and virtually all Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, is clearly authentic. The confusion was most likely due to an intra-Latin switch: The form of the word for “tree” in Latin in this passage is <i>ligno</i>; the word for “book” is <i>libro</i>. The two-letter difference accounts for an accidental alteration in some Latin <span class="smcaps">mss</span>; that “book of life” as well as “tree of life” is a common expression in the Apocalypse probably accounts for why this was not noticed by Erasmus or the KJV translators. (This textual problem is not discussed in NA<sup>27</sup>.)</p></p>
<p id="n6602238"><a href="file1255.xhtml#n6602238">38</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) read “amen” (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>) after “all” (<span class="greek">πάντων</span>, <span class="translit">pantōn</span>). It is, however, not found in other significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A 1006 1841). It is easier to account for its addition than its omission from the text if original. Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
