<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Thessalonians 2</h2>
<p id="n530021"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n530021">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “return” (cf. CEV).</p></p>
<p id="n530022"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n530022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “our gathering with him.”</p></p>
<p id="n530023"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n530023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n530024"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n530024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “quickly, soon.”</p></p>
<p id="n530025"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n530025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as through us.”</p></p>
<p id="n530026"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n530026">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for unless the rebellion comes first.” The clause about “the day” is understood from v. 2.</p></p>
<p id="n530027"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n530027">7</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> lat sy) read <span class="greek">ἁμαρτίας</span> (<span class="translit">hamartias</span>, “of sin”) here, but several significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B 0278 6 81 1739 1881 2464 <i>al</i> co) read <span class="greek">ἀνομίας</span> (<span class="translit">anomias</span>, “of lawlessness”). Although external support for <span class="greek">ἁμαρτίας</span> is broader, the generally earlier and better witnesses are on the side of <span class="greek">ἀνομίας</span>. Internally, since <span class="greek">ἁμαρτία</span> (<span class="translit">hamartia</span>, “sin”) occurs nearly ten times as often as <span class="greek">ἀνομία</span> (<span class="translit">anomia</span>, “lawlessness”) in the <i>corpus Paulinum</i>, scribes would be expected to change the text to the more familiar term. At the same time, the mention of <span class="greek">ἀνομία</span> in v. 7 and <span class="greek">ὁ ἄνομος</span> (<span class="translit">ho anomos</span>, “the lawless one”) in v. 8, both of which look back to v. 3, may have prompted scribes to change the text toward <span class="greek">ἀνομίας</span>. The internal evidence is thus fairly evenly balanced. Although a decision is difficult, <span class="greek">ἀνομίας</span> has slightly greater probability of authenticity than <span class="greek">ἁμαρτίας</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n530028"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n530028">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the one destined for destruction.”</p></p>
<p id="n530029"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n530029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one who opposes,” describing the figure in v. 3. A new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the personal pronoun (“he”) and translating the participle <span class="greek">ἀντικείμενος</span> (<span class="translit">antikeimenos</span>) as a finite verb.</p></p>
<p id="n5300210"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300210">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> Allusions to Isa 14:13-14; Dan 11:36; Ezek 28:2-9 respectively.</p></p>
<p id="n5300211"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that he is God.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300212"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “You do remember, don’t you?”</p></p>
<p id="n5300213"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and now,” but this shows the logical result of his previous teaching.</p></p>
<p id="n5300214"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the thing that restrains.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300215"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the mystery of lawlessness.” In Paul “mystery” often means “revealed truth, something formerly hidden but now made widely known,” but that does not make sense with the verb of this clause (“to be at work, to be active”).</p></p>
<p id="n5300216"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one who restrains.” This gives a puzzling contrast to the impersonal phrase in v. 6 (“the thing that restrains”). The restraint can be spoken of as a force or as a person. Some have taken this to mean the Roman Empire in particular or human government in general, since these are forces that can also be seen embodied in a person, the emperor or governing head. But apocalyptic texts like Revelation and Daniel portray human government of the end times as under Satanic control, not holding back his influence. Also the power to hold back Satanic forces can only come from God. So others understand this restraint to be some force from God: the preaching of the gospel or the working of the Holy Spirit through God’s people.</p></p>
<p id="n5300217"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300217">17</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several significant witnesses of the Alexandrian and Western traditions, as well as many other witnesses, read <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsous</span>, “Jesus”) after <span class="greek">κύριος</span> (<span class="translit">kurios</span>, “Lord”; so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D* F G L<sup>c</sup> P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 33 81 104 365 1241 2464 latt sy co). But there is sufficient evidence in the Alexandrian tradition for the shorter reading (B 1739 1881), supported by the Byzantine text, Irenaeus, and other witnesses (D<sup>2vid</sup> 630 1175 1505). Although it is possible that scribes overlooked <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span> if the two <i>nomina sacra</i> occurred together (<span class="uncial">kMsiMs</span>), since “the Lord Jesus” is a frequent enough appellation, it looks to be a motivated reading. NA<sup>28</sup> places <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span> in brackets, indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n5300218"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whose coming,” referring to the lawless one. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek construction, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5300219"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “every miracle.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300220"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “deception for/toward.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300221"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they did not accept the love of the truth.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300222"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and for this reason.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300223"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a working of error.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300224"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that.” A new sentence was started here in the translation for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n5300225"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “be judged,” but in this context the term clearly refers to a judgment of condemnation (BDAG 568 s.v. <span class="greek">κρίνω</span> 5.b.<span class="greek">α</span>; cf. KJV “that they all might be damned”). CEV views the condemnation as punishment (“will be punished”).</p></p>
<p id="n5300226"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n5300227"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300227">27</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B F G P 0278 33 81 323 1505 1739 1881 <i>al</i> bo) read <span class="greek">ἀπαρχήν</span> (<span class="translit">aparchēn</span>, “as a firstfruit”; i.e., as the first converts) instead of <span class="greek">ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς</span> (<span class="translit">ap</span>’<span class="translit"> archēs</span>, “from the beginning,” found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> D K L <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it sa), but this seems more likely to be a change by scribes who thought of the early churches in general in this way. But Paul would not be likely to call the Thessalonians “the firstfruits” among his converts. Further, <span class="greek">ἀπαρχή</span> (<span class="translit">aparchē</span>, “firstfruit”) is a well-worn term in Paul’s letters (Rom 8:23; 11:16; 16:5; 1 Cor 15:20, 23; 16:15), while <span class="greek">ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς</span> occurs nowhere else in Paul. Scribes might be expected to change the text to the more familiar term. Nevertheless, a decision is difficult (see arguments for <span class="greek">ἀπαρχήν</span> in <i>TCGNT</i> 568), and <span class="greek">ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς</span> must be preferred only slightly.</p></p>
<p id="n5300228"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to which,” referring to the main idea of v. 13.</p></p>
<p id="n5300229"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300229">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>That you may possess the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ</i>. For Paul the ultimate stage of salvation is glorification (Rom 8:30).</p></p>
<p id="n5300230"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n5300231"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that you were taught whether by word or by letter of ours.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300232"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> simply “strengthen,” with the object understood from the preceding.</p></p>
<p id="n5300233"><a href="file1171.xhtml#n5300233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “every good work and word.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
