<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 28</h2>
<p id="n440281"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n440281">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “We having been brought safely through” [to land] (same verb as 27:44). The word “shore” is implied, and the slight variations in translation from 27:44 have been made to avoid redundancy in English. The participle <span class="greek">διασωθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">diasōthentes</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n440282"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n440282">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Malta</i> is an island (known by the same name today) in the Mediterranean Sea south of Sicily. The ship had traveled 625 mi (1,000 km) in the storm.</p></p>
<p id="n440283"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n440283">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although this is literally <span class="greek">βάρβαροι</span> (<span class="translit">barbaroi</span>; “foreigners, barbarians”) used for non-Greek or non-Romans, as BDAG 166 s.v. <span class="greek">βάρβαρος</span> 2.b notes, “Of the inhabitants of Malta, who apparently spoke in their native language Ac 28:2, 4 (here <span class="greek">β</span>. certainly without derogatory tone…).”</p></p>
<p id="n440284"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n440284">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1019 s.v. <span class="greek">τυγχάνω</span> 2.d states, “<span class="greek">δυνάμεις οὐ τὰς τυχούσας</span> <i>extraordinary miracles</i> Ac 19:11. Cp. 28:2.”</p></p>
<p id="n440285"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n440285">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because it was about to rain.” BDAG 418 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐφίστημι</span> 4 states, “<span class="greek">διὰ τ</span>.<span class="greek"> ὑετὸν τὸν ἐφεστῶτα</span> <i>because it had begun to rain</i> Ac 28:2…But the mng. here could also be <i>because it threatened to rain</i> (s. 6).”</p></p>
<p id="n440286"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n440286">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sticks.”</p></p>
<p id="n440287"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n440287">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although this is literally <span class="greek">βάρβαροι</span> (<span class="translit">barbaroi</span>; “foreigners, barbarians”) used for non-Greek or non-Romans, as BDAG 166 s.v. <span class="greek">βάρβαρος</span> 2.b notes, “Of the inhabitants of Malta, who apparently spoke in their native language Ac 28:2, 4 (here <span class="greek">β</span>. certainly without derogatory tone…).”</p></p>
<p id="n440288"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n440288">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n440289"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n440289">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, the goddess Justice has not allowed him to live. BDAG 250 s.v. <span class="greek">δίκη</span> 2 states, “<i>Justice</i> personified as a deity Ac 28:4”; L&amp;N 12.27, “a goddess who personifies justice in seeking out and punishing the guilty—‘the goddess Justice.’ <span class="greek">ἡ δίκη ζῆν οὐκ εἴασεν</span> ‘the goddess Justice would not let him live’ Ac 28:4.” Although a number of modern English translations have rendered <span class="greek">δίκη</span> (<span class="translit">dikē</span>) “justice,” preferring to use an abstraction, in the original setting it is almost certainly a reference to a pagan deity. In the translation, the noun “justice” was capitalized and the reflexive pronoun “herself” was supplied to make the personification clear. This was considered preferable to supplying a word like ‘goddess’ in connection with <span class="greek">δίκη</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4402810"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402810">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> The entire scene is played out initially as a kind of oracle from the gods resulting in the judgment of a guilty person (<i>Justice herself has not allowed him to live</i>). Paul’s survival of this incident without ill effects thus spoke volumes about his innocence.</p></p>
<p id="n4402811"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402811">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 737 s.v. <span class="greek">οὖν</span> 4 indicates the particle has an adversative sense here: “<i>but, however</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402812"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402812">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402813"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402813">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “shaking the creature off…he suffered no harm.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποτινάξας</span> (<span class="translit">apotinaxas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402814"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402814">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “going to burn with fever.” According to BDAG 814 s.v. <span class="greek">πίμπρημι</span>, either meaning (“swell up” or “burn with fever”) is possible for Acts 28:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4402815"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">προσδοκώντων</span> (<span class="translit">prosdokōntōn</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402816"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402816">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">θεωρούντων</span> (<span class="translit">theōrountōn</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402817"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402817">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “happening.” The participle <span class="greek">γινόμενον</span> (<span class="translit">ginomenon</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402818"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402818">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “changing their minds.” The participle <span class="greek">μεταβαλόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">metabalomenoi</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402819"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402819">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>And said he was a god</i>. The reaction is like Acts 14:11-19 where the crowd wanted to make Paul and Barnabas into gods. The providence of God had protected Paul again.</p></p>
<p id="n4402820"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402820">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 798 s.v. <span class="greek">περί</span> 2.a.<span class="greek">γ</span> states, “of nearby places…<span class="greek">τὰ περὶ τὸν τὸπον</span> <i>the region around the place</i> Ac 28:7.” The presence of <span class="greek">ἐκεῖνον</span> (<span class="translit">ekeinon</span>) results in the translation “that place.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402821"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402821">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, the chief Roman official. Several inscriptions have confirmed the use of <span class="greek">πρῶτος</span> (<span class="translit">prōtos</span>) as an administrative title used on the island of Malta for the highest Roman official. See further BDAG 852 s.v. <span class="greek">Πόπλιος</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4402822"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402822">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened that the father.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402823"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402823">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to whom Paul going in.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) was replaced by a personal pronoun (“him”) and a new sentence begun here in the translation. The participle <span class="greek">εἰσελθών</span> (<span class="translit">eiselthōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402824"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402824">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιθείς</span> (<span class="translit">epitheis</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402825"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402825">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>And healed him</i>. Here are healings like Luke 9:40; 10:30; 13:13; Acts 16:23.</p></p>
<p id="n4402826"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402826">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 142 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀσθένεια</span> 1 states, “<span class="greek">ἔχειν ἀ</span>. <i>be ill</i> Ac 28:9.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402827"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402827">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Many…also came and were healed</i>. Again, here is irony. Paul, though imprisoned, “frees” others of their diseases.</p></p>
<p id="n4402828"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402828">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “they also honored us greatly”; <i>Grk</i> “they also honored us with many honors” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4402829"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402829">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.” In this case the simpler English “sail” is more appropriate. The English participle “preparing” has also been supplied, since the provisioning of the ship would take place some time before the actual departure.</p></p>
<p id="n4402830"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402830">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 384 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιτίθημι</span> 1.b has “<i>give</i> <span class="greek">τινί τι</span> <i>someth. to someone</i>…<span class="greek">ἀναγομένοις τὰ πρὸς τὰς χρείας</span> <i>when we sailed they gave us what we needed</i> Ac 28:10.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402831"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402831">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They gave us all the supplies we needed</i>. What they had lost in the storm and shipwreck was now replaced. Luke describes these pagans very positively.</p></p>
<p id="n4402832"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402832">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402833"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402833">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the ‘Twin Gods’”; <i>Grk</i> “the <i>Dioscuri</i>” (a joint name for the pagan deities Castor and Pollux).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>That had the</i> ‘<i>Heavenly Twins</i>’ <i>as its figurehead</i>. The twin brothers Castor and Pollux, known collectively as the <i>Dioscuri</i> or ‘Heavenly Twins,’ were the twin sons of Zeus and Leda according to Greek mythology. The Alexandrian ship on which Paul and his companions sailed from Malta had a carved emblem or figurehead of these figures, and they would have been the patron deities of the vessel. Castor and Pollux were the “gods of navigation.” To see their stars was considered a good omen (Epictetus, <i>Discourses</i> 2.18.29; Lucian of Samosata, <i>The Ship</i> 9).</p></p>
<p id="n4402834"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402834">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “as its emblem.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402835"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402835">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And putting in.” The participle <span class="greek">καταχθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">katachthentes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. On the meaning of the participle, BDAG 516 s.v. <span class="greek">κατάγω</span> states, “Hence the pass., in act. sense, of ships and seafarers <i>put in</i> <span class="greek">εἴς τι</span> <i>at a harbor</i>…<span class="greek">εἰς Συρακούσας</span> Ac 28:12.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4402836"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402836">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Syracuse</i> was a city on the eastern coast of the island of Sicily. It was 75 mi (120 km) from Malta.</p></p>
<p id="n4402837"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402837">37</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few early <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B <span class="greek">Ψ</span> [gig] sa [bo]) read <span class="greek">περιελόντες</span> (<span class="translit">perielontes</span>, “[From there we] cast off [and arrived at Rhegium]”; cf. Acts 27:40). The other major variant, <span class="greek">περιελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">perielthontes</span>, “[we] sailed from place to place”), is found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A 066 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy. Although <span class="greek">περιελόντες</span> is minimally attested, it is found in the better witnesses. As well, it is a more difficult reading, for its meaning as a nautical term is uncertain, requiring something like “<span class="greek">τὰς ἀγκύρας</span> be supplied = ‘we weighed anchor’” (BDAG 799 s.v. <span class="greek">περιαιρέω</span> 1). It thus best explains the rise of the other readings. </p></p>
<p id="n4402838"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402838">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Rhegium</i> was a city on the southern tip of Italy. It was 80 mi (130 km) from Syracuse.</p></p>
<p id="n4402839"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402839">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “after one day, a south wind springing up, on the second day.” The genitive absolute construction with the participle <span class="greek">ἐπιγενομένου</span> (<span class="translit">epigenomenou</span>) has been translated as a clause with a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402840"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402840">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Puteoli</i> was a city on the western coast of Italy south of Rome. It was in the Bay of Naples some 220 mi (350 km) to the north of Rhegium. Here the voyage ended; the rest of the journey was by land.</p></p>
<p id="n4402841"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402841">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “where.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“where”) has been replaced with the demonstrative pronoun (“there”) and a new sentence begun here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402842"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402842">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “finding.” The participle <span class="greek">εὑρόντες</span> (<span class="translit">heurontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402843"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402843">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, some fellow Christians.</p></p>
<p id="n4402845"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402845">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> Mention of Christian <i>brothers from there</i> (Rome) shows that God’s message had already spread as far as Italy and the capital of the empire.</p></p>
<p id="n4402846"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402846">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Forum of Appius</i> was a small traveler’s stop on the Appian Way about 43 Roman miles (62 km) south of Rome (BDAG 125 s.v. <span class="greek">᾿Αππίου φόρον</span>). It was described by Horace as “crammed with boatmen and stingy tavernkeepers” (<i>Satires</i> 1.5.3).</p></p>
<p id="n4402847"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402847">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Three Taverns</i> was a stop on the Appian Way 33 Roman miles (49 km) south of Rome.</p></p>
<p id="n4402848"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402848">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whom, when he saw [them], Paul.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) was replaced by the personal pronoun (“them”) and a new sentence begun here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402849"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402849">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to stay.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Allowed to live by himself</i>. Paul continued to have a generous prison arrangement (cf. Acts 27:3).</p></p>
<p id="n4402850"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402850">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened that after three days.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402851"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402851">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402852"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402852">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 33.309 has “‘after three days, he called the local Jewish leaders together’ Ac 28:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402853"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402853">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Men brothers,” but this is both awkward and unnecessary in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4402854"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402854">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ποιήσας</span> (<span class="translit">poiēsas</span>) has been translated as a concessive adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4402855"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402855">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>I had done nothing against our people or the customs of our ancestors</i>. Once again Paul claimed to be faithful to the Jewish people and to the God of Israel.</p></p>
<p id="n4402857"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402857">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “into the hands of the Romans,” but this is redundant when <span class="greek">παρεδόθην</span> (<span class="translit">paredothēn</span>) has been translated “handed over.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402858"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402858">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who when.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“who”) has been replaced by the personal pronoun (“they”) and a new sentence begun at this point in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402859"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402859">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “had questioned me”; or “had examined me.” BDAG 66 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνακρίνω</span> 2 states, “to conduct a judicial hearing, hear a case, question.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402860"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402860">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They wanted to release me</i>. See Acts 25:23-27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402861"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402861">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “no basis for death,” but in this context a sentence of death is clearly indicated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402862"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402862">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, objected to my release.</p></p>
<p id="n4402863"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402863">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the emperor” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p></p>
<p id="n4402864"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402864">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 533 s.v. <span class="greek">κατηγορέω</span> 1 states, “nearly always as legal t.t.: <i>bring charges</i> in court.” L&amp;N 33.427 states for <span class="greek">κατηγορέω</span>, “to bring serious charges or accusations against someone, with the possible connotation of a legal or court context—‘to accuse, to bring charges.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4402865"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402865">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “my own nation.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402866"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402866">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The hope of Israel</i>. A reference to Israel’s messianic <i>hope</i>. Paul’s preaching was in continuity with this Jewish hope (Acts 1:3; 8:12; 14:22; 19:8; 20:25).</p></p>
<p id="n4402867"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402867">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402868"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402868">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “arrived”; <i>Grk</i> “come” (“from there” is implied). <i>Grk</i> “coming.” The participle <span class="greek">παραγενόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">paragenomenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402869"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402869">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “regarding this sect it is known to us.” The passive construction “it is known to us” has been converted to an active one to simplify the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402870"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402870">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that everywhere it is spoken against.” To simplify the translation the passive construction “it is spoken against” has been converted to an active one with the subject “people” supplied.</p></p>
<p id="n4402871"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402871">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term translated “speak against,” see BDAG 89 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀντιλέγω</span> 1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402872"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402872">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Having set.” The participle <span class="greek">ταξάμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">taxamenoi</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402873"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402873">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Having set a day with him”; the words “to meet” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4402874"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402874">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “came to him in his rented quarters.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402875"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402875">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 848 s.v. <span class="greek">πολύς</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">β</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span> states, “<i>(even) more</i> <span class="greek">πλείονες</span> <i>in even greater numbers</i> Ac 28:23.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402876"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402876">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “things” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4402877"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402877">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to whom he explained.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) has been replaced by the pronoun (“them”) and a new sentence begun at this point in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402878"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402878">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 233 s.v. <span class="greek">διαμαρτύρομαι</span> 1 has “to make a solemn declaration about the truth of someth. <i>testify of, bear witness to</i> (orig. under oath)…<i>God</i>’<i>s kingdom</i> 28:23.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402879"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402879">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Testifying about the kingdom of God</i>. The topic is important. Paul’s preaching was about the rule of God and his promise in Jesus. Paul’s text was the Jewish scriptures. This is yet another summary of the message like that in 18:28. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching (along with Paul’s teaching here) has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See also Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21; Acts 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4402880"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402880">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “persuade.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402881"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402881">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “persuaded.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402882"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402882">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the things spoken.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402883"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402883">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Some were convinced…but others refused to believe</i>. Once again the gospel caused division among Jews, as in earlier chapters of Acts (13:46; 18:6).</p></p>
<p id="n4402884"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402884">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἀπελύοντο</span> (<span class="translit">apeluonto</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4402885"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402885">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402886"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402886">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you will hear with hearing” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4402887"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402887">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “seeing”; <i>Grk</i> “you will look by looking” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4402888"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402888">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “insensitive.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The heart of this people has become dull</i>. The charge from Isaiah is like Stephen’s against the Jews of Jerusalem (Acts 7:51-53). They were a hard-hearted and disobedient people.</p></p>
<p id="n4402889"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402889">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they hear heavily with their ears” (an idiom for slow comprehension).</p></p>
<p id="n4402890"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402890">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note how the failure to respond to the message of the gospel is seen as a failure to <i>turn</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4402891"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402891">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 6:9-10.</p></p>
<p id="n4402892"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402892">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Therefore let it be known to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402893"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402893">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402894"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402894">94</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>Gentiles</i> is in emphatic position in the Greek text of this clause. Once again there is the pattern: Jewish rejection of the gospel leads to an emphasis on Gentile inclusion (Acts 13:44-47).</p></p>
<p id="n4402895"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402895">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they also.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402896"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402896">96</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> include <b>28:29</b>: “When he had said these things, the Jews departed, having a great dispute among themselves.” Verse 29 is lacking in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 048 33 81 1175 1739 2464 and a number of versions. They are included (with a few minor variations) in <span class="apparatus">M</span> it and some versions. This verse is almost certainly not a part of the original text of Acts, as it lacks the best credentials. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n4402897"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402897">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402898"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402898">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “stayed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402899"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n4402899">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “two whole years at his own expense.” BDAG 654 s.v. <span class="greek">μίσθωμα</span> states, “the customary act. mng. ‘contract price, rent’…is not found in our lit. (Ac) and the pass. <i>what is rented, a rented house</i> is a mng. not found outside it (even Ammonius Gramm. [100 ad] p. 93 Valck. knows nothing of it. Hence the transl. <i>at his own expense</i> [NRSV] merits attention) <span class="greek">ἐν ἰδίῳ μισθώματι</span> <i>in his own rented lodgings</i> Ac 28:30 (for the idea cf. Jos., Ant. 18, 235).”</p></p>
<p id="n44028100"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n44028100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and received.”</p></p>
<p id="n44028101"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n44028101">101</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>the kingdom of God</i> in v. 23.</p></p>
<p id="n44028102"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n44028102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n44028103"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n44028103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “openness.”</p></p>
<p id="n44028104"><a href="file1090.xhtml#n44028104">104</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Proclaiming…with complete boldness and without restriction</i>. Once again Paul’s imprisonment is on benevolent terms. The word of God is proclaimed triumphantly and boldly in Rome. Acts ends with this note: Despite all the attempts to stop it, the message goes forth.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
