<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Galatians 5</h2>
<p id="n480051"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n480051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Translating the dative as “For freedom” shows the purpose for Christ setting us free; however, it is also possible to take the phrase in the sense of means or instrument (“with [or by] freedom”), referring to the freedom mentioned in 4:31 and implied throughout the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n480052"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n480052">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here the <i>yoke</i> figuratively represents the burdensome nature of slavery.</p></p>
<p id="n480053"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n480053">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “keep”; or “carry out”; <i>Grk</i> “do.”</p></p>
<p id="n480054"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n480054">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “trying to be justified.” The verb <span class="greek">δικαιοῦσθε</span> (<span class="translit">dikaiousthe</span>) has been translated as a conative present (see <i>ExSyn</i> 534).</p></p>
<p id="n480055"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n480055">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “estranged”; BDAG 526 s.v. <span class="greek">καταργέω</span> 4 states, “Of those who aspire to righteousness through the law <span class="greek">κ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἀπὸ Χριστοῦ</span> <i>be estranged from Christ</i> Gal 5:4.”</p></p>
<p id="n480056"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n480056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but faith working through love.”</p></p>
<p id="n480057"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n480057">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “following.” BDAG 792 s.v. <span class="greek">πείθω</span> 3.b states, “<i>obey, follow</i> w. dat. of the pers. or thing…Gal 3:1 v.l.; 5:7.”</p></p>
<p id="n480058"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n480058">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The persuasion,” referring to their being led away from the truth (v. 7). There is a play on words here that is not easily reproducible in the English translation: The words translated “obey” (<span class="greek">πείθεσθαι</span>, <span class="translit">peithesthai</span>) in v. 7 and “persuasion” (<span class="greek">πεισμονή</span>, <span class="translit">peismonē</span>) in v. 8 come from the same root in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n480059"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n480059">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “A little leaven leavens the whole lump.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800510"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb translated “I am confident” (<span class="greek">πέποιθα</span>, <span class="translit">pepoitha</span>) comes from the same root in Greek as the words translated “obey” (<span class="greek">πείθεσθαι</span>, <span class="translit">peithesthai</span>) in v. 7 and “persuasion” (<span class="greek">πεισμονή</span>, <span class="translit">peismonē</span>) in v. 8.</p></p>
<p id="n4800511"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that you will think nothing otherwise.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800512"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is stirring you up”; <i>Grk</i> “is troubling you.” In context Paul is referring to the confusion and turmoil caused by those who insist that Gentile converts to Christianity must observe the Mosaic law.</p></p>
<p id="n4800513"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will suffer condemnation” (L&amp;N 90.80); <i>Grk</i> “will bear his judgment.” The translation “must pay the penalty” is given as an explanatory gloss on the phrase by BDAG 171 s.v. <span class="greek">βαστάζω</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">β</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4800514"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4800515"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800515">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, if Paul still teaches observance of the Mosaic law (<i>preaches circumcision</i>), why is he <i>still being persecuted</i> by his opponents, who insist that Gentile converts to Christianity must observe the Mosaic law?</p></p>
<p id="n4800516"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800516">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>offense of the cross</i> refers to the offense to Jews caused by preaching Christ crucified.</p></p>
<p id="n4800517"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “nullified.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800518"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ones who are upsetting you.” The same verb is used in Acts 21:38 to refer to a person who incited a revolt. Paul could be alluding indirectly to the fact that his opponents are inciting the Galatians to rebel against his teaching with regard to circumcision and the law.</p></p>
<p id="n4800519"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “would even.” </p></p>
<p id="n4800520"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “make eunuchs of themselves”; <i>Grk</i> “cut themselves off.” This statement is rhetorical hyperbole on Paul’s part. It does strongly suggest, however, that Paul’s adversaries in this case (“those agitators”) were men. Some interpreters (notably Erasmus and the Reformers) have attempted to soften the meaning to a figurative “separate themselves” (meaning the opponents would withdraw from fellowship) but such an understanding dramatically weakens the rhetorical force of Paul’s argument. Although it has been argued that such an act of emasculation would be unthinkable for Paul, it must be noted that Paul’s statement is one of biting sarcasm, obviously not meant to be taken literally. See further G. Stählin, <i>TDNT</i> 3:853-55.</p></p>
<p id="n4800521"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4800522"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as an opportunity for the flesh”; BDAG 915 s.v. <span class="greek">σάρξ</span> 2.c.<span class="greek">α</span> states: “In Paul’s thought esp., all parts of the body constitute a totality known as <span class="greek">σ</span>. or <i>flesh</i>, which is dominated by sin to such a degree that wherever flesh is, all forms of sin are likew. present, and no good thing can live in the <span class="greek">σάρξ</span>…Gal 5:13, 24; …Opp. <span class="greek">τὸ πνεῦμα</span>…Gal 3:3; 5:16, 17ab; 6:8ab.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800523"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> It is possible that the verb <span class="greek">δουλεύετε</span> (<span class="translit">douleuete</span>) should be translated “serve one another in a humble manner” here, referring to the way in which slaves serve their masters (see L&amp;N 35.27).</p></p>
<p id="n4800524"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “can be fulfilled in one commandment.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800525"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800525">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 19:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4800526"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “if you are harming and exploiting one another.” Paul’s metaphors are retained in most modern translations, but it is possible to see the meanings of <span class="greek">δάκνω</span> and <span class="greek">κατεσθίω</span> (<span class="translit">daknō</span> and <span class="translit">katesthiō</span>, L&amp;N 20.26 and 88.145) as figurative extensions of the literal meanings of these terms and to translate them accordingly. The present tenses here are translated as customary presents (“continually…”).</p></p>
<p id="n4800527"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “destroyed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800528"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “walk” (a common NT idiom for how one conducts one’s life or how one behaves).</p></p>
<p id="n4800529"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term “flesh” (once in this verse and twice in v. 17) see the note on the same word in Gal 5:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4800530"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “has desires” do not occur in the Greek text a second time, but are repeated in the translation for clarity. </p></p>
<p id="n4800531"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800531">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “are hostile toward” (L&amp;N 39.1).</p></p>
<p id="n4800532"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “flesh” in Gal 5:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4800533"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “clear,” “evident.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800534"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800534">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “witchcraft.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800535"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “enmities,” “[acts of] hatred.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800536"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800536">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “discord” (L&amp;N 39.22).</p></p>
<p id="n4800537"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “discord(s)” (L&amp;N 39.13).</p></p>
<p id="n4800538"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term is plural in Greek (as is “murder” and “carousing”), but for clarity these abstract nouns have been translated as singular.</p></p>
<p id="n4800539"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800539">39</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ <span class="greek">φόνοι</span> (<span class="translit">phonoi</span>, “murders”) is absent in such significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> as <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B 33 81 323 945 sa, while the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A C D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0122 0278 1175 1241 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat bo) have the word. Although the pedigree of the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> which lack the term is of the highest degree, homoioteleuton may explain the shorter reading. The preceding word has merely one letter difference, making it quite possible to overlook this term (<span class="greek">φθόνοι φόνοι</span>, <span class="translit">phthonoi phonoi</span>). At the same time, <span class="greek">φθόνου φόνου</span> (<span class="translit">phthonou phonou</span>, “envy, murder”) is solidly attested in Rom 1:29, suggesting that scribes were not necessarily prone to dropping “murder” accidentally. A decision is difficult, with a slight preference for <span class="translit">phonoi</span> here.</p></p>
<p id="n4800540"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800540">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “revelings,” “orgies” (L&amp;N 88.287).</p></p>
<p id="n4800541"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800541">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, the fruit the Spirit produces.</p></p>
<p id="n4800542"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800542">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> Another way to punctuate this is “love” followed by a colon (<i>love: joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control</i>). It is thus possible to read the eight characteristics following “love” as defining love.</p></p>
<p id="n4800543"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “reliability”; see BDAG 818 s.v. <span class="greek">πίστις</span> 1.a.</p></p>
<p id="n4800544"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800544">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> “And” is supplied here as a matter of English style, which normally inserts “and” between the last two elements of a list or series.</p></p>
<p id="n4800545"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800545">45</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0122<sup>1</sup> 0278 33 1175 1241 1739 1881 co) read “Christ Jesus” here, while many significant ones (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> D F G 0122*<sup>,2</sup> 1505 2464 latt sy), as well as the Byzantine text, lack “Jesus.” The Byzantine text is especially not prone to omit the name “Jesus”; that it does so here argues for the authenticity of the shorter reading (for similar instances of probably authentic Byzantine shorter readings, see Matt 24:36 and Phil 1:14; cf. also W.-H. J. Wu, “A Systematic Analysis of the Shorter Readings in the Byzantine Text of the Synoptic Gospels” [Ph.D. diss., Dallas Theological Seminary, 2002]). On the strength of the alignment of <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> with the Western and Byzantine text-groups, the shorter reading is preferred. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4800546"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800546">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “flesh” in Gal 5:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4800547"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800547">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">παθήμασιν</span> (<span class="translit">pathēmasin</span>, translated “passions”) refers to strong physical desires, especially of a sexual nature (L&amp;N 25.30).</p></p>
<p id="n4800548"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800548">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “let us also follow,” “let us also walk by.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800549"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800549">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “falsely proud.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800550"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800550">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “irritating.” BDAG 871 s.v. <span class="greek">προκαλέω</span> has “<i>provoke, challenge</i> <span class="greek">τινά</span> <i>someone</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800551"><a href="file1144.xhtml#n4800551">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “another, envying one another.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
