<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Corinthians 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Corinthians<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Immaturity and Self-deception</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> So, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n460031" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n460031">1</a></sup> I could not speak to you as spiritual people, but instead as people of the flesh,<sup><a id="n460032" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n460032">2</a></sup> as infants in Christ. <span class="verse">3:2</span> I fed you milk,<sup><a id="n460033" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n460033">3</a></sup> not solid food, for you were not yet ready. In fact, you are still not ready, <span class="verse">3:3</span> for you are still influenced by the flesh.<sup><a id="n460034" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n460034">4</a></sup> For since there is still jealousy and dissension among you, are you not influenced by the flesh and behaving like unregenerate people?<sup><a id="n460035" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n460035">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:4</span> For whenever someone says, “I am with Paul,” or “I am with Apollos,” are you not merely human?<sup><a id="n460036" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n460036">6</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:5</span> What is Apollos, really? Or what is Paul? Servants through whom you came to believe, and each of us in the ministry the Lord gave us.<sup><a id="n460037" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n460037">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:6</span> I planted,<sup><a id="n460038" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n460038">8</a></sup> Apollos watered, but God caused it to grow. <span class="verse">3:7</span> So neither the one who plants counts for anything,<sup><a id="n460039" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n460039">9</a></sup> nor the one who waters, but God who causes the growth. <span class="verse">3:8</span> The one who plants and the one who waters work as one,<sup><a id="n4600310" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600310">10</a></sup> but each will receive his reward according to his work. <span class="verse">3:9</span> We are coworkers belonging to God.<sup><a id="n4600311" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600311">11</a></sup> You are God’s field, God’s building. <span class="verse">3:10</span> According to the grace of God given to me, like a skilled master-builder I laid a foundation, but someone else builds on it. And each one must be careful how he builds. <span class="verse">3:11</span> For no one can lay any foundation other than what is being laid, which is Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">3:12</span> If anyone builds on the foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, or straw,<sup><a id="n4600312" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600312">12</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:13</span> each builder’s<sup><a id="n4600313" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600313">13</a></sup> work will be plainly seen, for the Day<sup><a id="n4600314" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600314">14</a></sup> will make it clear, because it will be revealed by fire. And the fire<sup><a id="n4600315" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600315">15</a></sup> will test what kind of work each has done. <span class="verse">3:14</span> If what someone has built survives, he will receive a reward. <span class="verse">3:15</span> If someone’s work is burned up, he will suffer loss.<sup><a id="n4600316" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600316">16</a></sup> He himself will be saved, but only as through fire. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:16</span> Do you not know that you are God’s temple<sup><a id="n4600317" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600317">17</a></sup> and that God’s Spirit lives in you? <span class="verse">3:17</span> If someone destroys God’s temple, God will destroy him. For God’s temple is holy, which is what you are. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:18</span> Guard against self-deception, each of you.<sup><a id="n4600318" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600318">18</a></sup> If someone among you thinks he is wise in this age, let him become foolish so that he can become wise. <span class="verse">3:19</span> For the wisdom of this age is foolishness with God. As it is written, “<b><i>He catches the wise in their craftiness</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4600319" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600319">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:20</span> And again, “<b><i>The Lord knows that the thoughts of the wise are futile</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4600320" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600320">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:21</span> So then, no more boasting about mere mortals!<sup><a id="n4600321" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600321">21</a></sup> For everything belongs to you, <span class="verse">3:22</span> whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas<sup><a id="n4600322" href="file1111_notes.xhtml#n4600322">22</a></sup> or the world or life or death or the present or the future. Everything belongs to you, <span class="verse">3:23</span> and you belong to Christ, and Christ belongs to God. </p>

</body>
</html>