<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Thessalonians 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Thessalonians<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Life Pleasing to God</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Finally then, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n520041" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n520041">1</a></sup> we ask you and urge you in the Lord Jesus, that as you received instruction from us about how<sup><a id="n520042" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n520042">2</a></sup> you must live and please God (as you are in fact living)<sup><a id="n520043" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n520043">3</a></sup> that you do so more and more. <span class="verse">4:2</span> For you know what commands we gave you through the Lord Jesus. <span class="verse">4:3</span> For this is God’s will: that you become holy,<sup><a id="n520044" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n520044">4</a></sup> that you keep away from sexual immorality, <span class="verse">4:4</span> that each of you know how to possess his own body<sup><a id="n520045" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n520045">5</a></sup> in holiness and honor, <span class="verse">4:5</span> not in lustful passion like the Gentiles who do not know God. <span class="verse">4:6</span> In this matter no one should violate the rights of his brother or take advantage of him,<sup><a id="n520046" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n520046">6</a></sup> because the Lord is the avenger in all these cases,<sup><a id="n520047" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n520047">7</a></sup> as we also told you earlier and warned you solemnly. <span class="verse">4:7</span> For God did not call us to impurity but in holiness. <span class="verse">4:8</span> Consequently the one who rejects this is not rejecting human authority<sup><a id="n520048" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n520048">8</a></sup> but God, who gives his Holy Spirit to you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:9</span> Now on the topic of brotherly love<sup><a id="n520049" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n520049">9</a></sup> you have no need for anyone to write you, for you yourselves are taught by God to love one another. <span class="verse">4:10</span> And indeed you are practicing it toward all the brothers and sisters<sup><a id="n5200410" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200410">10</a></sup> in all of Macedonia. But we urge you, brothers and sisters, to do so more and more,<sup><a id="n5200411" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200411">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:11</span> to aspire to lead a quiet life, to attend to your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you. <span class="verse">4:12</span> In this way you will live<sup><a id="n5200412" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200412">12</a></sup> a decent life before outsiders and not be in need.<sup><a id="n5200413" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200413">13</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord Returns for Believers</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:13</span> Now we do not want you to be uninformed,<sup><a id="n5200414" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200414">14</a></sup> brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5200415" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200415">15</a></sup> about those who are asleep,<sup><a id="n5200416" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200416">16</a></sup> so that you will not grieve like the rest who have no hope. <span class="verse">4:14</span> For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so also we believe that<sup><a id="n5200417" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200417">17</a></sup> God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep as Christians.<sup><a id="n5200418" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200418">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:15</span> For we tell you this by the word of the Lord,<sup><a id="n5200419" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200419">19</a></sup> that we who are alive, who are left until the coming of the Lord, will surely not go ahead of those who have fallen asleep. <span class="verse">4:16</span> For the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a shout of command, with the voice of the archangel,<sup><a id="n5200420" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200420">20</a></sup> and with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first. <span class="verse">4:17</span> Then we who are alive, who are left,<sup><a id="n5200421" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200421">21</a></sup> will be suddenly caught up<sup><a id="n5200422" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200422">22</a></sup> together<sup><a id="n5200423" href="file1167_notes.xhtml#n5200423">23</a></sup> with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we will always be with the Lord. <span class="verse">4:18</span> Therefore encourage one another with these words. </p>

</body>
</html>