<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 13</h2>
<p id="n450131"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n450131">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by God.”</p></p>
<p id="n450132"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n450132">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the authority,” referring to the authority just described.</p></p>
<p id="n450133"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n450133">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it.”</p></p>
<p id="n450134"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n450134">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “its wrath”; the referent (the governing authorities) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n450135"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n450135">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because of (the) conscience,” but the English possessive “your” helps to show whose conscience the context implies.</p></p>
<p id="n450136"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n450136">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the governing authorities) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n450137"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n450137">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “devoted to this very thing.”</p></p>
<p id="n450138"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n450138">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For the…” (with the word “commandments” supplied for clarity). The Greek article (“the”) is used here as a substantiver to introduce the commands that are quoted from the second half of the Decalogue (<i>ExSyn</i> 238).</p></p>
<p id="n450139"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n450139">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 20:13-15, 17; Deut 5:17-19, 21.</p></p>
<p id="n4501310"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n4501310">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 19:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4501311"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n4501311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and this,” probably referring to the command to love (13:8-10); hence, “do” is implied from the previous verses.</p></p>
<p id="n4501312"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n4501312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">εἰδότες</span> (<span class="translit">eidotes</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4501313"><a href="file1104.xhtml#n4501313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “make no provision for the flesh unto desires.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
