<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Mark 16</h2>
<p id="n410161"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n410161">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term see BDAG 140 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄρωμα</span>. The Jews did not practice embalming, so these materials were used to cover the stench of decay and slow decomposition.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Spices</i> were used not to preserve the body, but as an act of love, and to mask the growing stench of a corpse.</p></p>
<p id="n410162"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n410162">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n410163"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n410163">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410164"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n410164">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> Mark does not explicitly identify the <i>young man dressed in a white robe</i> as an angel (though the white robe suggests this), but Matthew does (Matt 28:2).</p></p>
<p id="n410165"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n410165">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Crucify</i> in 15:13.</p></p>
<p id="n410166"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n410166">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb here is passive (<span class="greek">ἠγέρθη</span>, <span class="translit">ēgerthē</span>). This “divine passive” (see <i>ExSyn</i> 437-38) points to the fact that Jesus was raised by God.</p></p>
<p id="n410167"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n410167">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410168"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n410168">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “trembling and bewilderment began to grip them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101610"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n4101610">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Gospel of Mark ends at this point in some witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B sy<sup>s</sup> sa<sup>ms</sup> arm<sup>mss</sup> geo<sup>mss</sup> Eus Eus<sup>mss</sup> Hier<sup>mss</sup>), including two of the most respected <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B). This is known as the “short ending.” The following “intermediate” ending is found in some <span class="smcaps">mss</span>: “They reported briefly to those around Peter all that they had been commanded. After these things Jesus himself sent out through them, from the east to the west, the holy and imperishable preaching of eternal salvation. Amen.” This intermediate ending is usually included with the longer ending (L <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 083 099 579 <i>pc</i>); k, however, ends at this point. Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> include the “long ending” (vv. 9-20) immediately after v. 8 (A C D W [which has unique material between vv. 14 and 15] <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy<sup>c,p,h</sup> bo); however, Eusebius (and presumably Jerome) knew of almost no Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that had this ending. Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have marginal comments noting that earlier Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span> lacked the verses. Internal evidence strongly suggests the secondary nature of both the intermediate and the long endings. Their vocabulary, syntax, and style are decidedly non-Markan (for further details, see <i>TCGNT</i> 102-6). All of this evidence indicates that as time went on scribes added the longer ending, either for the richness of its material or because of the abruptness of the ending at v. 8. (Indeed, the strange variety of dissimilar endings attests to the likelihood that early scribes had a copy of Mark that ended at v. 8, and they filled out the text with what seemed to be an appropriate conclusion. All of the witnesses for alternative endings to vv. 9-20 thus indirectly confirm the Gospel as ending at v. 8.) Because of such problems regarding the authenticity of these alternative endings, 16:8 is usually regarded today as the last verse of the Gospel of Mark. There are three possible explanations for Mark ending at 16:8: (1) The author intentionally ended the Gospel here in an open-ended fashion; (2) the Gospel was never finished; or (3) the last leaf of the ms was lost prior to copying. This first explanation is the most likely due to several factors, including (a) the probability that the Gospel was originally written on a scroll rather than a codex (only on a codex would the last leaf get lost prior to copying); (b) the unlikelihood of the ms not being completed; and (c) the literary power of ending the Gospel so abruptly that the readers are now drawn into the story itself. E. Best aptly states, “It is in keeping with other parts of his Gospel that Mark should not give an explicit account of a conclusion where this is already well known to his readers” (<i>Mark</i>, 73; note also his discussion of the ending of this Gospel on 132 and elsewhere). The readers must now ask themselves, “What will I do with Jesus? If I do not accept him in his suffering, I will not see him in his glory.” For further discussion and viewpoints, see <i>Perspectives on the Ending of Mark: Four Views</i>, ed. D. A. Black (Nashville: B&amp;amp;H Academic, 2008); Nicholas P. Lunn, <i>The Original Ending of Mark: A New Case for the Authenticity of Mark 16:9-20</i> (London: Pickwick, 2014); Gregory P. Sapaugh, “An Appraisal of the Intrinsic Probability of the Longer Endings of the Gospel of Mark” (Ph.D. diss., Dallas Theological Seminary, 2012).</p><p><b>sn</b> Double brackets have been placed around this passage to indicate that most likely it was not part of the original text of the Gospel of Mark. In spite of this, the passage has an important role in the history of the transmission of the text, so it has been included in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4101611"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n4101611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “tongues,” though the word is used figuratively (perhaps as a metonymy of cause for effect). To “speak in tongues” meant to “speak in a foreign language,” though one that was new to the one speaking it and therefore due to supernatural causes. For a discussion concerning whether such was a human language, heavenly language, or merely ecstatic utterance, see BDAG 201-2 s.v. <span class="greek">γλῶσσα</span> 2, 3; BDAG 399 s.v. <span class="greek">ἕτερος</span> 2; L&amp;N 33.2-4; <i>ExSyn</i> 698; C. M. Robeck Jr., “Tongues,” <i>DPL</i>, 939-43.</p></p>
<p id="n4101612"><a href="file1014.xhtml#n4101612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> For further comment on the nature of this statement, whether it is a promise or prediction, see <i>ExSyn</i> 403-6.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
