<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for John 3</h2>
<p id="n430031"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n430031">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 1:24.</p></p>
<p id="n430032"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n430032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a ruler of the Jews” (denoting a member of the Sanhedrin, the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n430033"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n430033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n430034"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n430034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “during the night.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Possibly Nicodemus <i>came</i>…<i>at night</i> because he was afraid of public association with Jesus, or he wanted a lengthy discussion without interruptions; no explanation for the timing of the interview is given by the author. But the timing is significant for John in terms of the light-darkness motif—compare John 9:4; 11:10; 13:30 (especially), 19:39, and 21:3. Out of the darkness of his life and religiosity Nicodemus came to the Light of the world. The author probably had multiple meanings or associations in mind here, as is often the case.</p></p>
<p id="n430035"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n430035">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The reference to <i>signs</i> (<span class="greek">σημεῖα</span>, <span class="translit">sēmeia</span>) forms a link with John 2:23-25. Those people in Jerusalem believed in Jesus because of the signs he had performed. Nicodemus had apparently seen them too. But for Nicodemus all the signs meant is that Jesus was a great teacher sent from God. His approach to Jesus was well-intentioned but theologically inadequate; he had failed to grasp the messianic implications of the miraculous signs.</p></p>
<p id="n430036"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n430036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered and said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n430037"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n430037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly, truly, I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n430038"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n430038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word <span class="greek">ἄνωθεν</span> (<span class="translit">anōthen</span>) has a double meaning, either “again” (in which case it is synonymous with <span class="greek">παλίν</span> [<span class="translit">palin</span>]) or “from above” (BDAG 92 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄνωθεν</span>). This is a favorite technique of the author of the Fourth Gospel, and it is lost in almost all translations at this point. John uses the word 5 times, in 3:3, 7; 3:31; 19:11 and 23. In the latter 3 cases the context makes clear that it means “from above.” Here (3:3, 7) it could mean either, but the primary meaning intended by Jesus is “from above.” Nicodemus apparently understood it the other way, which explains his reply, “How can a man be born when he is old? He can’t enter his mother’s womb a second time and be born, can he?” The author uses the technique of the “misunderstood question” often to bring out a particularly important point: Jesus says something which is misunderstood by the disciples or (as here) someone else, which then gives Jesus the opportunity to explain more fully and in more detail what he really meant.</p><p><b>sn</b> Or <i>born again</i>. The Greek word <span class="greek">ἄνωθεν</span> (<span class="translit">anōthen</span>) can mean both “again” and “from above,” giving rise to Nicodemus’ misunderstanding about a second physical birth (v. 4).</p></p>
<p id="n430039"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n430039">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. But what does Jesus’ statement about not being able to <i>see the kingdom of God</i> mean within the framework of John’s Gospel? John uses the word <i>kingdom</i> (<span class="greek">βασιλεία</span>, <span class="translit">basileia</span>) only 5 times (3:3, 5; 18:36 [3x]). Only here is it qualified with the phrase <i>of God</i>. The fact that John does not stress the concept of the <i>kingdom of God</i> does not mean it is absent from his theology, however. Remember the messianic implications found in John 2, both the wedding and miracle at Cana and the cleansing of the temple. For Nicodemus, the term must surely have brought to mind the messianic kingdom which Messiah was supposed to bring. But Nicodemus had missed <i>precisely</i> this point about <i>who</i> Jesus was. It was the Messiah himself with whom Nicodemus was speaking. Whatever Nicodemus understood, it is clear that the point is this: He misunderstood Jesus’ words. He over-literalized them, and thought Jesus was talking about repeated physical birth, when he was in fact referring to new spiritual birth.</p></p>
<p id="n4300310"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The grammatical structure of the question in Greek presupposes a negative reply.</p></p>
<p id="n4300311"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly, truly, I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300312"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “born of water and wind” (the same Greek word, <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> [<span class="translit">pneumatos</span>], may be translated either “spirit/Spirit” or “wind”). </p><p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ somewhat enigmatic statement points to the necessity of being born “from above,” because <i>water</i> and <i>wind/spirit/Spirit</i> come from above. Isaiah 44:3-5 and Ezek 37:9-10 are pertinent examples of <i>water</i> and <i>wind</i> as life-giving symbols of the Spirit of God in his work among people. Both occur in contexts that deal with the future restoration of Israel as a nation prior to the establishment of the messianic kingdom. It is therefore particularly appropriate that Jesus should introduce them in a conversation about entering the kingdom of God. Note that the Greek word <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> is anarthrous (has no article) in v. 5. This does not mean that <i>spirit</i> in the verse should be read as a <i>direct</i> reference to the Holy Spirit, but that both water and wind are figures (based on passages in the OT, which Nicodemus, <i>the teacher of Israel</i> should have known) that represent the regenerating work of the Spirit in the lives of men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n4300313"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300313">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>What is born of the flesh is flesh</i>, i.e., what is born of physical heritage is physical. (It is interesting to compare this terminology with that of the dialogue in John 4, especially 4:23, 24.) For John the “flesh” (<span class="greek">σάρξ</span>, <span class="translit">sarx</span>) emphasizes merely the weakness and mortality of the creature—a neutral term, not necessarily sinful as in Paul. This is confirmed by the reference in John 1:14 to the <i>Logos</i> becoming “flesh.” The author avoids associating sinfulness with the incarnate Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n4300314"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> “All” has been supplied to indicate the plural pronoun in the Greek text. </p></p>
<p id="n4300315"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “born again.” The same Greek word with the same double meaning occurs in v. 3.</p></p>
<p id="n4300316"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The same Greek word, <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> (<span class="translit">pneumatos</span>), may be translated “wind” or “spirit.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300317"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300317">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> Again, the physical illustrates the spiritual, although the force is heightened by the word-play here on wind-spirit (see the note on <i>wind</i> at the beginning of this verse). By the end of the verse, however, the final usage of <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> (<span class="translit">pneumatos</span>) refers to the Holy Spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n4300318"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Nicodemus answered and said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300319"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300319">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>How can these things be?</i>” is Nicodemus’ answer. It is clear that at this time he has still not grasped what Jesus is saying. Note also that this is the last appearance of Nicodemus in the dialogue. Having served the purpose of the author, at this point he disappears from the scene. As a character in the narrative, he has served to illustrate the prevailing Jewish misunderstanding of Jesus’ teaching about the necessity of a new, spiritual birth from above. Whatever parting words Nicodemus might have had with Jesus, the author does not record them.</p></p>
<p id="n4300320"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus answered and said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300321"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300321">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ question <i>“Are you the teacher of Israel and yet you don’t understand these things?”</i> implies that Nicodemus had enough information at his disposal from the OT scriptures to have understood Jesus’ statements about the necessity of being born from above by the regenerating work of the Spirit. Isa 44:3-5 and Ezek 37:9-10 are passages Nicodemus might have known which would have given him insight into Jesus’ words. Another significant passage which contains many of these concepts is Prov 30:4-5.</p></p>
<p id="n4300322"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly, truly, I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300323"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to show the contrast present in the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4300324"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied in the translation to indicate that the verb is second person plural (referring to more than Nicodemus alone).</p></p>
<p id="n4300325"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300325">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note the remarkable similarity of Jesus’ <i>testimony</i> to the later testimony of the Apostle John himself in 1 John 1:2: “And we have seen and testify and report to you the eternal life which was with the Father and was revealed to us.” This is only one example of how thoroughly the author’s own thoughts were saturated with the words of Jesus (and also how difficult it is to distinguish the words of Jesus from the words of the author in the Fourth Gospel).</p></p>
<p id="n4300326"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied to indicate that the verb is second person plural (referring to more than Nicodemus alone).</p></p>
<p id="n4300327"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300327">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> Obviously <i>earthly things</i> and <i>heavenly things</i> are in contrast, but what is the contrast? What are <i>earthly things</i> which Jesus has just spoken to Nicodemus? And through him to others—this is not the first instance of the plural pronoun, see v. 7, <i>you must all</i>. Since Nicodemus began with a plural (<i>we know</i>, v. 2) Jesus continues it, and through Nicodemus addresses a broader audience. It makes most sense to take this as a reference to the things Jesus has just said (and the things he is about to say, vv. 13-15). If this is the case (and it seems the most natural explanation) then <i>earthly things</i> are not necessarily strictly <i>physical</i> things, but are so called because they take place on earth, in contrast to things like v. 16, which take place in heaven. Some have added the suggestion that the things are called <i>earthly</i> because physical analogies (birth, wind, water) are used to describe them. This is possible, but it seems more probable that Jesus calls these things <i>earthly</i> because they happen on earth (even though they are spiritual things). In the context, taking <i>earthly things</i> as referring to the words Jesus has just spoken fits with the fact that Nicodemus did not believe. And he would not after hearing <i>heavenly things</i> either, unless he first believed in the <i>earthly things</i>—which included the necessity of a regenerating work from above, by the Holy Spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n4300328"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300328">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And no one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300329"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300329">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> The verb <i>ascended</i> is a perfect tense in Greek (<span class="greek">ἀναβέβηκεν</span>, <span class="translit">anabebēken</span>) which seems to look at a past, completed event. (This is not as much of a problem for those who take Jesus’ words to end at v. 12, and these words to be a comment by the author, looking back on Jesus’ ascension.) As a saying of Jesus, these words are a bit harder to explain. Note, however, the lexical similarities with 1:51: “ascending,” “descending,” and “son of man.” Here, though, the ascent and descent is accomplished by the Son himself, not the angels as in 1:51. There is no need to limit this saying to Jesus’ ascent following the resurrection, however; the point of the Jacob story (Gen 28), which seems to be the background for 1:51, is the freedom of communication and relationship between God and men (a major theme of John’s Gospel). This communication comes through the angels in Gen 28 (and John 1:51), but here (most appropriately) it comes directly through <i>the Son of Man</i>. Although Jesus could be referring to a prior ascent, after an appearance as the preincarnate Son of Man, more likely he is simply pointing out that no one from earth has ever gone up to heaven and come down again. The Son, who has come down from heaven, is the only one who has been ‘up’ there. In both Jewish intertestamental literature and later rabbinic accounts, Moses is portrayed as ascending to heaven to receive the Torah and descending to distribute it to men (e.g., <i>Targum</i> Ps 68:19.) In contrast to these Jewish legends, the Son is the only one who has ever made the ascent and descent.</p></p>
<p id="n4300330"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300330">30</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including a few very significant ones (A<sup>[</sup>*<sup>]</sup> <span class="greek">Θ Ψ</span> 050 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy<sup>c,p,h</sup>), have at the end of this verse “the one who is in heaven” (<span class="greek">ὁ ὢν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ</span>, <span class="translit">ho ōn en tō ouranō</span>). A few others have variations on this phrase, such as “who was in heaven” (e sy<sup>c</sup>), or “the one who is from heaven” (0141 sy<sup>s</sup>). The witnesses normally considered the best, along with several others, lack the phrase in its entirety (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L T W<sup>s</sup> 083 086 33 1241 co). On the one hand, if the reading <span class="greek">ὁ ὢν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ</span> is authentic it may suggest that while Jesus was speaking to Nicodemus he spoke of himself as in heaven even while he was on earth. If that is the case, one could see why variations from this hard saying arose: “who <i>was</i> in heaven,” “the one who is <i>from</i> heaven,” and omission of the clause. At the same time, such a saying could be interpreted (though with difficulty) as part of the narrator’s comments rather than Jesus’ statement to Nicodemus, alleviating the problem. And if v. 13 was viewed in early times as the evangelist’s statement, “the one who is in heaven” could have crept into the text through a marginal note. Other internal evidence suggests that this saying may be authentic. The adjectival participle, <span class="greek">ὁ ὤν</span>, is used in the Fourth Gospel more than any other NT book (though the Apocalypse comes in a close second), and frequently with reference to Jesus (1:18; 6:46; 8:47). It may be looking back to the LXX of Exod 3:14 (<span class="greek">ἐγώ εἰμι ὁ ὤν</span>). Especially since this exact construction is not necessary to communicate the location of the Son of Man, its presence in many witnesses here may suggest authenticity. Further, John uses the singular of <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>, “heaven”) in all 18 instances of the word in this Gospel, and all but twice with the article (only 1:32 and 6:58 are anarthrous, and even in the latter there is significant testimony to the article). At the same time, the witnesses that lack this clause are very weighty and must not be discounted. Generally speaking, if other factors are equal, the reading of such <span class="smcaps">mss</span> should be preferred. And internally, it could be argued that <span class="greek">ὁ ὤν</span> is the most concise way to speak of the Son of Man in heaven <i>at that time</i> (without the participle the point would be more ambiguous). Further, the articular singular <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> is already used twice in this verse, thus sufficiently prompting scribes to add the same in the longer reading. This combination of factors suggests that <span class="greek">ὁ ὢν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ</span> is not a genuine Johannism. Further intrinsic evidence against the longer reading relates to the evangelist’s purposes: If he intended v. 13 to be his own comments rather than Jesus’ statement, his switch back to Jesus’ words in v. 14 (for the lifting up of the Son of Man is still seen as in the future) seems inexplicable. The reading “who is in heaven” thus seems to be too hard. All things considered, as intriguing as the longer reading is, it seems almost surely to have been a marginal gloss added inadvertently to the text in the process of transmission. For an argument in favor of the longer reading, see David Alan Black, “The Text of John 3:13, ” <i>GTJ</i> 6 (1985): 49-66.</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on the title <i>Son of Man</i> in 1:51.</p></p>
<p id="n4300331"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300331">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And just as.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300332"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300332">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> Or <i>the snake</i>, referring to the bronze serpent mentioned in Num 21:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4300333"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300333">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Num 21:5-9.</p></p>
<p id="n4300334"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300334">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>So must the Son of Man be lifted up</i>. This is ultimately a prediction of Jesus’ crucifixion. Nicodemus could not have understood this, but John’s readers, the audience to whom the Gospel is addressed, certainly could have (compare the wording of John 12:32). In John, being <i>lifted up</i> refers to one continuous action of ascent, beginning with the cross but ending at the right hand of the Father. Step 1 is Jesus’ death; step 2 is his resurrection; and step 3 is the ascension back to heaven. It is the upward swing of the “pendulum” which began with the incarnation, the descent of the Word become flesh from heaven to earth (cf. Paul in Phil 2:5-11). See also the note on the title <i>Son of Man</i> in 1:51.</p></p>
<p id="n4300335"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300335">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is the first use of the term <span class="greek">ζωὴν αἰώνιον</span> (<span class="translit">zōēn aiōnion</span>) in the Gospel, although <span class="greek">ζωή</span> (<span class="translit">zōē</span>) in chap. 1 is to be understood in the same way without the qualifying <span class="greek">αἰώνιος</span> (<span class="translit">aiōnios</span>).</p><p><b>sn</b> Some interpreters extend the quotation of Jesus’ words through v. 21.</p></p>
<p id="n4300336"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300336">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “this is how much”; or “in this way.” The Greek adverb <span class="greek">οὕτως</span> (<span class="translit">houtōs</span>) can refer (1) to the <i>degree</i> to which God loved the world, that is, to such an <i>extent</i> or <i>so much</i> that he gave his own Son (see R. E. Brown, <i>John</i> [AB], 1:133-34; D. A. Carson, <i>John</i>, 204) or (2) simply to the <i>manner</i> in which God loved the world, i.e., by sending his own son (see R. H. Gundry and R. W. Howell, “The Sense and Syntax of John 3:14-17 with Special Reference to the Use of <span class="greek">Οὕτως</span>…<span class="greek">ὥστε</span> in John 3:16, ” <i>NovT</i> 41 [1999]: 24-39)<b>.</b> Though the term more frequently refers to the manner in which something is done (see BDAG 741-42 s.v. <span class="greek">οὕτω</span>/<span class="greek">οὕτως</span>), the following clause involving <span class="greek">ὥστε</span> (<span class="translit">hōste</span>) plus the indicative (which stresses actual, but [usually] unexpected result) emphasizes the greatness of the gift God has given. With this in mind, then, it is likely (3) that John is emphasizing both the <i>degree</i> to which God loved the world as well as the <i>manner</i> in which He chose to express that love. This is in keeping with John’s style of using double entendre or double meaning. Thus, the focus of the Greek construction here is on the <i>nature</i> of God’s love, addressing its mode, intensity, and extent.</p></p>
<p id="n4300337"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300337">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although this word is often translated “only begotten,” such a translation is misleading, since in English it appears to express a metaphysical relationship. The word in Greek was used of an only child (a son [Luke 7:12; 9:38] or a daughter [Luke 8:42]). It was also used of something unique (only one of its kind) such as the mythological Phoenix (1 Clement 25:2). From here it passes easily to a description of Isaac (Heb 11:17 and Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 1.13.1 [1.222]) who was not Abraham’s <i>only</i> son, but was one-of-a-kind because he was the child of the promise. Thus the word means “one-of-a-kind” and is reserved for Jesus in the Johannine literature of the NT. While all Christians are children of God (<span class="greek">τέκνα θεοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">tekna theou</span>), Jesus is God’s Son in a unique, one-of-a-kind sense. The word is used in this way in all its uses in the Gospel of John (1:14, 18; 3:16, 18).</p></p>
<p id="n4300338"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300338">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> In John the word <span class="greek">ἀπόλλυμι</span> (<span class="translit">apollumi</span>) can mean either (1) to be lost (2) to perish or be destroyed, depending on the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4300339"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300339">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> The alternatives presented are only two (again, it is typical of Johannine thought for this to be presented in terms of polar opposites): <i>perish</i> or <i>have eternal life</i>. </p></p>
<p id="n4300340"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300340">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, “to judge the world to be guilty and liable to punishment.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300341"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300341">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “judged.” </p></p>
<p id="n4300342"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300342">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “judged.” </p></p>
<p id="n4300343"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300343">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the term “one and only” in 3:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4300344"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300344">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “this is the reason for God judging,” or “this is how judgment works.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300345"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300345">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and men,” but in a generic sense, referring to people of both genders (as “everyone” in v. 20 makes clear).</p></p>
<p id="n4300346"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300346">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John 3:16-21</i> provides an introduction to the (so-called) “realized” eschatology of the Fourth Gospel: Judgment has come; eternal life may be possessed now, in the present life, as well as in the future. The terminology “realized eschatology” was originally coined by E. Haenchen and used by J. Jeremias in discussion with C. H. Dodd, but is now characteristically used to describe Dodd’s own formulation. See L. Goppelt, <i>Theology of the New Testament</i>, 1:54, note 10, and R. E. Brown (<i>John</i> [AB], 1:cxvii-cxviii) for further discussion. Especially important to note is the element of choice portrayed in John’s Gospel. As Brown observes, “If there is a twofold reaction to Jesus in John’s Gospel, it should be emphasized that that reaction is very much dependent on a person’s choice, a choice that is influenced by his way of life, whether his deeds are wicked or are done in God (John 3:20-21). Thus, there is nodeterminism in John as there seems to be in some of the passages of the Qumranscrolls” (<i>John</i> [AB], 1:148). Only when one looks beneath the surface does one find statements like “no one can come to me, unless the Father who sent me draws him” (John 6:44).</p></p>
<p id="n4300347"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300347">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> This section is related loosely to the preceding by <span class="greek">μετὰ ταῦτα</span> (<span class="translit">meta tauta</span>). This constitutes an indefinite temporal reference; the intervening time is not specified.</p></p>
<p id="n4300348"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300348">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John</i> refers to John the Baptist.</p></p>
<p id="n4300349"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300349">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The precise locations of <span class="greek">Αἰνών</span> (<span class="translit">Ainōn</span>) and <span class="greek">Σαλείμ</span> (<span class="translit">Saleim</span>) are unknown. Three possibilities are suggested: (1) In Perea, which is in Transjordan (cf. 1:28). Perea is just across the river from Judea. (2) In the northern Jordan Valley, on the west bank some 8 miles [13 km] south of Scythopolis. But with the Jordan River so close, the reference to abundant water (3:23) seems superfluous. (3) Thus Samaria has been suggested. 4 miles (6.6 km) east of Shechem is a town called Salim, and 8 miles (13 km) northeast of Salim lies modern Ainun. In the general vicinity are many springs. Because of the meanings of the names (<span class="greek">Αἰνών</span> = “springs” in Aramaic and <span class="greek">Σαλείμ</span> = Salem, “peace”) some have attempted to allegorize here that John the Baptist is <i>near</i> salvation. Obviously there is no need for this. It is far more probable that the author has in mind real places, even if their locations cannot be determined with certainty.</p></p>
<p id="n4300350"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300350">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “people were continually coming.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300351"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300351">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to him” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4300352"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300352">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4300353"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300353">53</a> <p><b>tc</b> Was this dispute between the Baptist’s disciples and an individual Judean (<span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαίου</span>, <span class="translit">Ioudaiou</span>) or representatives of the Jewish authorities (<span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαίων</span>, <span class="translit">Ioudaiōn</span>)? There is good external support for the plural <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαίων</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 565 <i>al</i> latt), but the external evidence for the singular <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαίου</span> is slightly stronger (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A B L <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1241 the majority of Byzantine minuscules and others).</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “a certain Judean.” Here BDAG 478 s.v. <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαίος</span> 2.a states, “Judean (with respect to birth, nationality, or cult).” If the emphasis is simply on the individual’s origin, “Judean” would be preferable since it designates a nationality or place of origin. However, the mention of ceremonial washing in the context suggests the dispute was religious in nature, so “Jew” has been retained in the translation here.</p></p>
<p id="n4300354"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300354">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “ceremonial cleansing,” or “purification.”</p><p><b>sn</b> What was the controversy <i>concerning ceremonial washing</i>? It is not clear. Some have suggested that it was over the relative merits of the baptism of Jesus and John. But what about the ceremonial nature of the washing? There are so many unanswered questions here that even R. E. Brown (who does not usually resort to dislocations in the text as a solution to difficulties) proposes that this dialogue originally took place immediately after 1:19-34 and before the wedding at Cana. (Why else the puzzled hostility of the disciples over the crowds coming to Jesus?) Also, the synoptics imply John was imprisoned before Jesus began his Galilean ministry. At any rate, there is no reason to rearrange the material here—it occurs in this place for a very good reason. As far as the author is concerned, it serves as a further continuation of the point made to Nicodemus, that is, the necessity of being born “from above” (3:3). Note that John the Baptist describes Jesus as “the one who comes from heaven” in 3:31 (<span class="greek">ἄνωθεν</span> [<span class="translit">anōthen</span>], the same word as in 3:3). There is another lexical tie to preceding material: The subject of the dispute, <i>ceremonial washing</i> (3:25), calls to mind the six stone jars of water changed to wine at the wedding feast in 2:6, put there for “Jewish ceremonial washing.” This section ultimately culminates and concludes ideas begun in chap. 2 and continued in chap. 3. Although the author does not supply details, one scenario would be this: The disciples of John, perplexed after this disagreement with an individual Jew (or with the Jewish authorities), came to John and asked about the fact that Jesus was baptizing and more and more were coming to him. John had been preaching a baptism of repentance for forgiveness of sin (see Mark 1:4, Luke 3:3). Possibly what the Jew(s) reported to John’s disciples was that Jesus was now setting aside the Jewish purification rituals as unnecessary. To John’s disciples this might also be interpreted as: (a) a falling away from Judaism, and (b) a break with John’s own teaching. That Jesus could have said this is very evident from many incidents in his ministry in all the gospels. The thrust would be that outward cleansing (that is, observance of purification rituals) was not what made a person clean. A new heart within (that is, being born from above) is what makes a person clean. So John’s disciples came to him troubled about an apparent contradiction in doctrine though the explicit problem they mentioned is that Jesus was baptizing and multitudes were coming to him. (Whether Jesus was or was not baptizing really wasn’t the issue though, and John the Baptist knew that because he didn’t mention it in his reply. In 4:2 the author says that Jesus was not baptizing, but his disciples. That reference would seem to cover this incident as well, and so the disciples of John are just reporting what they have heard, or thought they heard.) The real point at issue is the <i>authority</i> of Jesus to “overturn” the system of ritual purification within Judaism. John replied to this question of the authority of Jesus in 3:27-36. In 3:27-30 he reassured his disciples, reminding them that if more people were coming to Jesus, it did not threaten him at all, because “heaven” had ordained it to be so (v. 27). (After all, some of these very disciples of John had presumably heard him tell the Jewish delegation that he was not the Messiah but was sent before him, mentioned in John 1.) Then John compared himself to the friend of the bridegroom who stands by and yet participates in the bridegroom’s joy (v. 29). John was completely content in his own position as forerunner and preparer of the way.</p></p>
<p id="n4300355"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300355">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> “River” is not in the Greek text but is supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300356"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300356">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered and said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300357"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300357">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah” (Both Greek “Christ” and Hebrew and Aramaic “Messiah” mean “one who has been anointed”).</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:20.</p></p>
<p id="n4300358"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300358">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “rejoices with joy” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4300359"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300359">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Therefore this my joy is fulfilled.” </p></p>
<p id="n4300360"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300360">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> Some interpreters extend the quotation of John the Baptist’s words through v. 36.</p></p>
<p id="n4300361"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300361">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is above all.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300362"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300362">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “speaks from the earth.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300363"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300363">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The one who comes from heaven</i> refers to Christ. As in John 1:1, the Word’s preexistence is indicated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4300364"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300364">64</a> <p><b>tc</b> <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* D ƒ<sup>1</sup> 565 as well as several versions and fathers lack the phrase “is superior to all” (<span class="greek">ἐπάνω πάντων ἐστίν</span>, <span class="translit">epanō pantōn estin</span>). This effectively joins the last sentence of v. 31 with v. 32: “The one who comes from heaven testifies about what he has seen and heard, but no one accepts his testimony.” On the other side, the phrase may have been deleted because of perceived redundancy, since it duplicates what is said earlier in the verse. The witnesses that include <span class="greek">ἐπάνω πάντων ἐστίν</span> in both places are weighty and widespread (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>36vid,66</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A B L W<sup>s</sup> <span class="greek">Θ Ψ</span> 083 086 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy<sup>s,p,h</sup> bo). On balance, the longer reading should probably be considered authentic.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “is above all.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300365"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300365">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is true.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300366"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300366">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n4300367"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300367">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for not by measure does he give the Spirit” (an idiom). <i>Leviticus Rabbah</i> 15:2 states: “The Holy Spirit rested on the prophets by measure.” Jesus is contrasted to this. The Spirit rests upon him without measure.</p></p>
<p id="n4300368"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300368">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has given all things into his hand” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4300369"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300369">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “refuses to believe,” or “disobeys.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300370"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300370">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “anger because of evil,” or “punishment.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300371"><a href="file1043.xhtml#n4300371">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “resides.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
