<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Corinthians 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Corinthians<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Learning from Israel’s Failures</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:1</span> For I do not want you to be unaware,<sup><a id="n460101" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n460101">1</a></sup> brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n460102" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n460102">2</a></sup> that our fathers were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea, <span class="verse">10:2</span> and all were baptized<sup><a id="n460103" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n460103">3</a></sup> into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, <span class="verse">10:3</span> and all ate the same spiritual food, <span class="verse">10:4</span> and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they were all drinking from the spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ. <span class="verse">10:5</span> But God was not pleased with most of them, for they were cut down in the wilderness. <span class="verse">10:6</span> These things happened as examples for us, so that we will not crave evil things as they did. <span class="verse">10:7</span> So do not be idolaters, as some of them were. As it is written, “<b><i>The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n460104" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n460104">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:8</span> And let us not be immoral, as some of them were, and 23,000 died in a single day.<sup><a id="n460105" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n460105">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:9</span> And let us not put Christ<sup><a id="n460106" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n460106">6</a></sup> to the test, as some of them did, and were destroyed by snakes.<sup><a id="n460107" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n460107">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:10</span> And do not complain, as some of them did, and were killed by the destroying angel.<sup><a id="n460108" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n460108">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:11</span> These things happened to them as examples and were written for our instruction, on whom the ends of the ages have come. <span class="verse">10:12</span> So let the one who thinks he is standing be careful that he does not fall. <span class="verse">10:13</span> No trial has overtaken you that is not faced by others.<sup><a id="n460109" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n460109">9</a></sup> And God is faithful: He<sup><a id="n4601010" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n4601010">10</a></sup> will not let you be tried beyond what you are able to bear,<sup><a id="n4601011" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n4601011">11</a></sup> but with the trial will also provide a way out so that you may be able to endure it.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Avoid Idol Feasts</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:14</span> So then, my dear friends, flee from idolatry. <span class="verse">10:15</span> I am speaking to thoughtful people. Consider what I say. <span class="verse">10:16</span> Is not the cup of blessing that we bless a sharing in the blood of Christ? Is not the bread that we break a sharing in the body of Christ? <span class="verse">10:17</span> Because there is one bread, we who are many are one body, for we all share the one bread. <span class="verse">10:18</span> Look at the people of Israel.<sup><a id="n4601012" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n4601012">12</a></sup> Are not those who eat the sacrifices partners in the altar? <span class="verse">10:19</span> Am I saying that idols or food sacrificed to them amount to anything? <span class="verse">10:20</span> No, I mean that what the pagans sacrifice<sup><a id="n4601013" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n4601013">13</a></sup> is to demons and not to God. I do not want you to be partners with demons. <span class="verse">10:21</span> You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons. You cannot take part in the table of the Lord and the table of demons. <span class="verse">10:22</span> Or are we trying to provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we really stronger than he is?<sup><a id="n4601014" href="file1118_notes.xhtml#n4601014">14</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>