<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Peter 3</h2>
<p id="n610031"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n610031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I am already writing this [as] a second letter.” The object-complement construction is more smoothly rendered in English a bit differently. Further, although the present tense <span class="greek">γράφω</span> (<span class="translit">graphō</span>) is used here, English convention employs an epistolary past tense. (The Greek epistolary aorist might have been expected here, but it also occurs in situations unlike its English counterparts.)</p></p>
<p id="n610032"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n610032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The relative pronoun is plural, indicating that the following statement is true about both letters.</p></p>
<p id="n610033"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n610033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I have stirred up, aroused.” The translation treats the present tense verb as a conative present.</p></p>
<p id="n610034"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n610034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to remember.” “I want you” is supplied to smooth out the English. The Greek infinitive is subordinate to the previous clause.</p></p>
<p id="n610035"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n610035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Both” is not in Greek; it is supplied to show more clearly that there are two objects of the infinitive “to remember”—predictions and commandment.</p></p>
<p id="n610036"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n610036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “words.” In conjunction with <span class="greek">πρόειπον</span> (<span class="translit">proeipon</span>), however, the meaning of the construction is that the prophets uttered prophecies.</p></p>
<p id="n610037"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n610037">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Holy prophets…apostles</i>. The first chapter demonstrated that the OT prophets were trustworthy guides (1:19-21) and that the NT apostles were also authoritative (1:16-18). Now, using the same catch phrase found in the Greek text of 1:20 (<span class="greek">τοῦτο πρῶτον γινώσκοντες</span>, <span class="translit">touto prōton ginōskontes</span>), Peter points to specific prophecies of the prophets as an argument against the false teachers.</p></p>
<p id="n610038"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n610038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing this [to be] foremost.” <span class="greek">Τοῦτο πρῶτον</span> (<span class="translit">touto prōton</span>) constitute the object and complement of <span class="greek">γινώσκοντες</span> (<span class="translit">ginōskontes</span>). The participle is loosely dependent on the infinitive in v. 2 (“[I want you] to recall”), perhaps in a telic sense (thus, “[I want you] to recall…[and especially] to understand this as foremost”). The following statement then would constitute the main predictions with which the author was presently concerned. An alternative is to take it imperativally: “Above all, know this.” In this instance, however, there is little semantic difference (since a telic participle and imperatival participle end up urging an action). Cf. also 2 Pet 1:20.</p></p>
<p id="n610039"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n610039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek reads “scoffers in their scoffing” for “blatant scoffers.” The use of the cognate dative is a Semitism designed to intensify the word it is related to. The idiom is foreign to English. As a Semitism, it is further incidental evidence of the authenticity of the letter (see the note on “Simeon” in 1:1 for other evidence). </p></p>
<p id="n6100310"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going according to their own evil urges.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100311"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The present participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>, “saying”) most likely indicates result. Thus, their denial of the Lord’s return is the result of their lifestyle. The connection to the false teachers of chapter 2 is thus made clear.</p></p>
<p id="n6100312"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Where is the promise of his coming?” The genitive <span class="greek">παρουσίας</span> (<span class="translit">parousias</span>, “coming, advent, return”) is best taken as an attributed genitive (in which the head noun, <i>promise</i>, functions semantically as an adjective; see <i>ExSyn</i> 89-91). </p></p>
<p id="n6100313"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The prepositional phrase with the relative pronoun, <span class="greek">ἀφ᾿ ἧς</span> (<span class="translit">aph</span>’<span class="translit"> |ēs</span>), is used adverbially or conjunctively without antecedent (see BDAG 727 s.v. <span class="greek">ὅς</span> 1.k.).</p></p>
<p id="n6100314"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fathers.” The reference could be either to the OT patriarchs or first generation Christians. This latter meaning, however, is unattested in any other early Christian literature.</p></p>
<p id="n6100315"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">κοιμάω</span> (<span class="translit">koimaō</span>) literally means “sleep,” but it is often used in the Bible as a euphemism for the death of a believer.</p></p>
<p id="n6100316"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “thus,” “in the same manner.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100317"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek is difficult at this point. An alternative is “Even though they maintain this, it escapes them that…” Literally the idea seems to be: “For this escapes these [men] who wish [it to be so].” </p></p>
<p id="n6100318"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word order in Greek places “the word of God” at the end of the sentence. See discussion in the note on “these things” in v. 6.</p></p>
<p id="n6100319"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “land,” “the earth.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100320"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The antecedent is ambiguous. It could refer to the heavens, the heavens and earth, or the water and the word. If the reference is to the heavens, the author is reflecting on the Genesis account about “the floodgates of the heavens” being opened (Gen 7:11). If the reference is to the heavens and earth, he is also thinking about the cosmic upheaval that helped to produce the flood (Gen 6:11). If the reference is to the water and the word, he is indicating both the means (water) and the cause (word of God). This last interpretation is the most likely since the final nouns of v. 5 are “water” and “word of God,” making them the nearest antecedents. </p></p>
<p id="n6100321"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ungodly people.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100322"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The same verb, <span class="greek">λανθάνω</span> (<span class="translit">lanthanō</span>, “escape”) used in v. 5 is found here (there, translated “suppress”).</p></p>
<p id="n6100323"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “the Lord is not delaying [the fulfillment of] his promise,” or perhaps “the Lord of the promise is not delaying.” The verb can mean “to delay,” “to be slow,” or “to be hesitant.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100324"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not wishing.” The participle most likely has a causal force, explaining why the Lord is patient.</p></p>
<p id="n6100325"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100325">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He does not wish for any to perish</i>. This verse has been a battleground between Arminians and Calvinists. The former argue that God wants all people to be saved, but either through inability or restriction of his own sovereignty does not interfere with peoples’ wills. Some of the latter argue that the “any” here means “any <i>of you</i>” and that all the elect will repent before the return of Christ, because this is God’s will. Both of these positions have problems. The “any” in this context means “any of you.” (This can be seen by the dependent participle which gives the reason why the Lord is patient “toward you.”) There are hints throughout this letter that the readership may be mixed, including both true believers and others who are “sitting on the fence” as it were. But to make the equation of this readership with the elect is unlikely. This would seem to require, in its historical context, that all of these readers would be saved. But not all who attend church know the Lord or will know the Lord. Simon the Magician, whom Peter had confronted in Acts 8, is a case in point. This is evident in contemporary churches when a pastor addresses the congregation as “brothers, sisters, saints, etc.,” yet concludes the message with an evangelistic appeal. When an apostle or pastor addresses a group as “Christian” he does not necessarily think that every individual in the congregation is truly a Christian. Thus, the literary context seems to be against the Arminian view, while the historical context seems to be against (one representation of) the Calvinist view. The answer to this conundrum is found in the term “wish” (a participle in Greek from the verb <span class="translit">boulomai</span>). It often represents a mere wish, or one’s desiderative will, rather than one’s resolve. Unless God’s will is viewed on the two planes of his desiderative and decretive will (what he desires and what he decrees), hopeless confusion will result. The scriptures amply illustrate both that God sometimes decrees things that he does not desire and desires things that he does not decree. It is not that his will can be thwarted, nor that he has limited his sovereignty. But the mystery of God’s dealings with humanity is best seen if this tension is preserved. Otherwise, either God will be perceived as good but impotent or as a sovereign taskmaster. Here the idea that God does not <i>wish</i> for any to perish speaks only of God’s desiderative will, without comment on his decretive will.</p></p>
<p id="n6100326"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “reach to repentance.” Repentance thus seems to be a quantifiable state, or turning point. The verb <span class="greek">χωρέω</span> (<span class="translit">chōreō</span>, “reach”) typically involves the connotation of “obtain the full measure of” something. It is thus most appropriate as referring to the repentance that accompanies conversion.</p></p>
<p id="n6100327"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100328"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100328">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “pass away.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100329"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “hissing sound,” “whirring sound,” “rushing sound,” or “loud noise.” The word occurs only here in the NT. It was often used of the crackle of a fire, as would appear appropriate in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6100330"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100330">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “elements.” Most commentators are agreed that “celestial bodies” is meant, in light of this well-worn usage of <span class="greek">στοιχεῖα</span> (<span class="translit">stoicheia</span>) in the 2nd century and the probable allusion to Isa 34:4 (text of Vaticanus). See R. Bauckham, <i>Jude, 2 Peter</i> [WBC]<i>,</i> 315-16 for discussion.</p></p>
<p id="n6100331"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100331">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “be dissolved.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100332"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100332">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “being burned up.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100333"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100333">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the works in it.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100334"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100334">34</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ One of the most difficult textual problems in the NT is found in v. 10. The reading <span class="greek">εὑρεθήσεται</span> (<span class="translit">heurethēsetai</span>), which enjoys by far the best support (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B K P 0156<sup>vid</sup> 323 1175 1241 1739<sup>txt</sup> 1852) is nevertheless so difficult a reading that many scholars regard it as nonsensical. (NA<sup>27</sup> lists five conjectures by scholars, from Hort to Mayor, in this text. All conjectures were eliminated in the NA<sup>28</sup> apparatus) As R. Bauckham has pointed out, solutions to the problem are of three sorts: (1) conjectural emendation (which normally speaks more of the ingenuity of the scholar who makes the proposal than of the truth of the conjecture, e.g., changing one letter in the previous word, <span class="greek">ἔργα</span> [<span class="translit">erga</span>] becomes <span class="greek">ἄργα</span> [<span class="translit">arga</span>] with the meaning, “the earth and the things in it will be found <i>useless</i>”); (2) adoption of one of several variant readings (all of which, however, are easier than this one and simply cannot explain how this reading arose, e.g., the reading of <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> which adds <span class="greek">λυόμενα</span> [<span class="translit">luomena</span>] to the verb—a reading suggested no doubt by the threefold occurrence of this verb in the surrounding verses: “the earth and its works will be found dissolved”; or the simplest variant, the reading of the Sahidic <span class="smcaps">mss</span> and a couple of other ancient versions, <span class="greek">οὐχ</span> [<span class="translit">ouch</span>] preceding <span class="greek">εὑρεθήσεται</span>—“will not be found”); or (3) interpretive gymnastics which regards the text as settled but has to do some manipulation to its normal meaning. Bauckham puts forth an excellent case that the third option is to be preferred and that the meaning of the term is virtually the equivalent of “will be disclosed,” “will be manifested.” (That this meaning is not readily apparent may in fact have been the reason for so many variants and conjectures.) Thus, the force of the clause is that “the earth and the works [done by men] in it will be stripped bare [before God].” In addition, the unusualness of the expression is certainly in keeping with the author’s style throughout this little book. Hence, what looks to be suspect because of its abnormalities, upon closer inspection is actually in keeping with the author’s stylistic idiosyncrasies. The meaning of the text then is that all but the earth and mankind’s works will be destroyed. Everything will be removed so that humanity will stand naked before God. Textually, then, on both external and internal grounds, <span class="greek">εὑρεθήσεται</span> commends itself as the preferred reading.</p></p>
<p id="n6100335"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100335">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all these things thus being dissolved.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100336"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100336">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “thus.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100337"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100337">37</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have a pronoun with the infinitive—either <span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">humas</span>, “you”; found in A C P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 048<sup>vid</sup> 33 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span>, the corrector of <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup>, the second corrector of <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>, and many other witnesses), <span class="greek">ἡμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">hēmas</span>, “we”; read by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* 5 630 2464), or <span class="greek">ἑαυτούς</span> (<span class="translit">heautous</span>, “[you your]selves/[we our]selves,” read by 1243). But the shorter reading (with no pronoun) has the support of <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72*,74vid</sup> B 1175. Though slim, the evidence for the omission is nevertheless the earliest. Further, the addition of some pronoun, especially the second person pronoun, seems to be a clarifying variant. It would be difficult to explain the pronoun’s absence in some witnesses if the pronoun were original. That three different pronouns have shown up in the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> is testimony for the omission’s authenticity. Thus, on external and internal grounds, the omission is preferred. For English style requirements, however, <i>some</i> pronoun has to be added. NA<sup>27</sup> has <span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span> in brackets, indicating doubt as to its authenticity, while NA<sup>28</sup> drops the brackets.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “you.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100338"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100338">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in holy conduct and godliness.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100339"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100339">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly, “striving for,” but the meaning “hasten” for <span class="greek">σπουδάζω</span> (<span class="translit">spoudazō</span>) is normative in Jewish apocalyptic literature (in which the coming of the Messiah/the end is anticipated). Such a hastening is not an arm-twisting of the divine volition, but a response by believers that has been decreed by God. </p></p>
<p id="n6100340"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100340">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The coming of the day of God</i>. Peter elsewhere describes the coming or <i>parousia</i> as the coming of <i>Christ</i> (cf. 2 Pet 1:16; 3:4). The almost casual exchange between “God” and “Christ” in this little book, and elsewhere in the NT, argues strongly for the deity of Christ (see esp. 1:1).</p></p>
<p id="n6100341"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100341">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on account of which” (a subordinate relative clause in Greek).</p></p>
<p id="n6100342"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100342">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “being burned up, will dissolve.” </p></p>
<p id="n6100343"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100343">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> See note in v. 10 on “celestial bodies.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100344"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100344">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “being burned up” (see v. 10).</p></p>
<p id="n6100345"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100345">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly, “let us wait for.” The form in Greek (<span class="greek">προσδόκωμεν</span>, <span class="translit">prosdokōmen</span>) could be either indicative or subjunctive. The present participle in v. 14, however, is best taken causally (“since you are waiting for”), suggesting that the indicative is to be read here.</p></p>
<p id="n6100346"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100346">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> The relative pronoun is plural, indicating that the sphere in which righteousness dwells is both the new heavens and the new earth.</p></p>
<p id="n6100347"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100347">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “dwells.” The verb <span class="greek">κατοικέω</span> (<span class="translit">katoikeō</span>) is an intensive cognate of <span class="greek">οἰκέω</span> (<span class="translit">oikeō</span>), often with the connotation of “taking up residence,” “settling down,” being at home,” etc. Cf., e.g., Matt 2:23; Acts 17:26; 22:12; Eph 3:17; Col 1:19; 2:9. Hence, the addition of the adverb “truly” is implicit in the connotation of the verb in a context such as this.</p></p>
<p id="n6100348"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100348">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “dear friends, waiting for.” See note in v. 13 on “waiting for.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100349"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100349">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek verb used in the phrase <i>strive to be found</i> is the same as is found in v. 10, translated “laid bare.” In typical Petrine fashion, a conceptual link is made by the same linkage of terms. The point of these two verses thus becomes clear: When the heavens disappear and the earth and its inhabitants are stripped bare before the throne of God, they should strive to make sure that their lives are pure and that they have nothing to hide.</p></p>
<p id="n6100350"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100350">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> “When you come into” is not in Greek. However, the dative pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτῷ</span> (<span class="translit">autō</span>) does not indicate agency (“by him”), but presence or sphere. The idea is “strive to be found {before him/in his presence}.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100351"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100351">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> The language here is cryptic. It probably means “regard the patience of our Lord as an opportunity for salvation.” In the least, Peter is urging his audience to take a different view of the delay of the <i>parousia</i> than that of the false teachers.</p></p>
<p id="n6100352"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100352">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> Critics generally assume that 2 Peter is not authentic, partially because in vv. 15-16 <i>Paul</i> is said to have written scripture. It is assumed that a recognition of Paul’s writings as scripture could not have happened until early in the 2nd century. However, in the same breath that Paul is canonized, Peter also calls him “<i>brother</i>.” This is unparalleled in the 2nd century apocryphal works, as well as early patristic writings, in which the apostles are universally elevated <i>above</i> the author and readers; here, Peter simply says “he’s one of us.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100353"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100353">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Paul wrote to you</i>. That Paul had written to these people indicates that they are most likely Gentiles. Further, that Peter is now writing to them suggests that Paul had already died, for Peter was the apostle to the circumcised. Peter apparently decided to write his two letters to Paul’s churches shortly after Paul’s death, both to connect with them personally and theologically (Paul’s gospel is Peter’s gospel) and to warn them of the wolves in sheep’s clothing that would come in to destroy the flock. Thus, part of Peter’s purpose seems to be to anchor his readership on the written documents of the Christian community (both the Old Testament and Paul’s letters) as a safeguard against heretics.</p></p>
<p id="n6100354"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100354">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as also in all his letters speaking in them of these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100355"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100355">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which are some things hard to understand.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100356"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100356">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which.” The antecedent is the “things hard to understand,” not the entirety of Paul’s letters. A significant principle is seen here: The primary proof texts used for faith and practice ought to be the clear passages that are undisputed in their meaning. Heresy today is still largely built on obscure texts.</p></p>
<p id="n6100357"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100357">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “distort,” “wrench,” “torture” (all are apt descriptions of what heretics do to scripture).</p></p>
<p id="n6100358"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100358">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> This one incidental line, <i>the rest of the scriptures</i>, links Paul’s writings with scripture. This is thus one of the earliest affirmations of any part of the NT as scripture. Peter’s words were prophetic and were intended as a preemptive strike against the heretics to come.</p></p>
<p id="n6100359"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100359">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing beforehand.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100360"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100360">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “lawless ones.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>These unprincipled men</i>. The same word is used in 2:7, suggesting further that the heretics in view in chapter 3 are the false teachers of chapter 2.</p></p>
<p id="n6100361"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100361">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fall from your firmness.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100362"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100362">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “knowledge” (<span class="greek">γνῶσις</span>, <span class="translit">gnōsis</span>) used here is not the same as is found in 2 Pet 1:2, 3, 8; 2:20. This term is found in 1:5 and 1:6.</p></p>
<p id="n6100363"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100363">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “until.”</p></p>
<p id="n6100364"><a href="file1220.xhtml#n6100364">64</a> <p><b>tc</b> The vast bulk of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> adds <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”) at the end of this letter, as they do almost all the rest of the NT books (only Acts, James, and 3 John lack a majority of witnesses supporting a concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>). The omission in B 1241 1243 1739* 1881 2298 appears to be original, although the fact that some of the best and earliest Alexandrian witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 5 33 81 436 442 1611 1735 1739<sup>c</sup> 1852 2344 2492 co), along with several other <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, the Byzantine text, and early versions (vg sy), add the particle renders such a judgment less than iron-clad. NA<sup>27</sup> places the word in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity, while NA<sup>28</sup> omits the word.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “day of eternity.” </p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
