<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Mark 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing and Forgiving a Paralytic </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Now<sup><a id="n410021" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n410021">1</a></sup> after some days, when he returned to Capernaum,<sup><a id="n410022" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n410022">2</a></sup> the news spread<sup><a id="n410023" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n410023">3</a></sup> that he was at home. <span class="verse">2:2</span> So many gathered that there was no longer any room, not even by<sup><a id="n410024" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n410024">4</a></sup> the door, and he preached the word to them. <span class="verse">2:3</span> Some people<sup><a id="n410025" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n410025">5</a></sup> came bringing to him a paralytic, carried by four of them.<sup><a id="n410026" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n410026">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:4</span> When they were not able to bring him in because of the crowd, they removed the roof<sup><a id="n410027" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n410027">7</a></sup> above Jesus.<sup><a id="n410028" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n410028">8</a></sup> Then,<sup><a id="n410029" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n410029">9</a></sup> after tearing it out, they lowered the stretcher the paralytic was lying on. <span class="verse">2:5</span> When Jesus saw their<sup><a id="n4100210" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100210">10</a></sup> faith, he said to the paralytic, “Son, your sins are forgiven.”<sup><a id="n4100211" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100211">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:6</span> Now some of the experts in the law<sup><a id="n4100212" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100212">12</a></sup> were sitting there, turning these things over in their minds:<sup><a id="n4100213" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100213">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:7</span> “Why does this man speak this way? He is blaspheming!<sup><a id="n4100214" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100214">14</a></sup> Who can forgive sins but God alone?” <span class="verse">2:8</span> Now<sup><a id="n4100215" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100215">15</a></sup> immediately, when Jesus realized in his spirit that they were contemplating such thoughts,<sup><a id="n4100216" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100216">16</a></sup> he said to them, “Why are you thinking such things in your hearts?<sup><a id="n4100217" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100217">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:9</span> Which is easier,<sup><a id="n4100218" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100218">18</a></sup> to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Stand up, take your stretcher, and walk’? <span class="verse">2:10</span> But so that you may know<sup><a id="n4100219" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100219">19</a></sup> that the Son of Man<sup><a id="n4100220" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100220">20</a></sup> has authority on earth to forgive sins,”—he said to the paralytic<sup><a id="n4100221" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100221">21</a></sup> — <span class="verse">2:11</span> “I tell you, stand up, take your stretcher, and go home.”<sup><a id="n4100222" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100222">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:12</span> And immediately the man<sup><a id="n4100223" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100223">23</a></sup> stood up, took his stretcher, and went out in front of them all. They were all amazed and glorified God, saying, “We have never seen anything like this!” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Call of Levi; Eating with Sinners </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:13</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100224" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100224">24</a></sup> went out again by the sea. The whole crowd came to him, and he taught them. <span class="verse">2:14</span> As he went along, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting at the tax booth.<sup><a id="n4100225" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100225">25</a></sup> “Follow me,” he said to him. And he got up and followed him. <span class="verse">2:15</span> As Jesus<sup><a id="n4100226" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100226">26</a></sup> was having a meal<sup><a id="n4100227" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100227">27</a></sup> in Levi’s<sup><a id="n4100228" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100228">28</a></sup> home, many tax collectors<sup><a id="n4100229" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100229">29</a></sup> and sinners were eating with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many who followed him. <span class="verse">2:16</span> When the experts in the law<sup><a id="n4100230" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100230">30</a></sup> and the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4100231" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100231">31</a></sup> saw that he was eating with sinners and tax collectors, they said to his disciples, “Why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?”<sup><a id="n4100232" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100232">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:17</span> When Jesus heard this he said to them, “Those who are healthy don’t need a physician, but those who are sick do.<sup><a id="n4100233" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100233">33</a></sup> I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Superiority of the New </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:18</span> Now<sup><a id="n4100234" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100234">34</a></sup> John’s<sup><a id="n4100235" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100235">35</a></sup> disciples and the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4100237" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100237">37</a></sup> were fasting.<sup><a id="n4100238" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100238">38</a></sup> So<sup><a id="n4100239" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100239">39</a></sup> they came to Jesus<sup><a id="n4100240" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100240">40</a></sup> and said, “Why do the disciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples don’t fast?” <span class="verse">2:19</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100241" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100241">41</a></sup> said to them, “The wedding guests<sup><a id="n4100242" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100242">42</a></sup> cannot fast while the bridegroom<sup><a id="n4100243" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100243">43</a></sup> is with them, can they?<sup><a id="n4100244" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100244">44</a></sup> As long as they have the bridegroom with them they do not fast. <span class="verse">2:20</span> But the days are coming when the bridegroom will be taken from them,<sup><a id="n4100245" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100245">45</a></sup> and at that time<sup><a id="n4100246" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100246">46</a></sup> they will fast. <span class="verse">2:21</span> No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; otherwise, the patch pulls away from it, the new from the old, and the tear becomes worse. <span class="verse">2:22</span> And no one pours new wine into old wineskins;<sup><a id="n4100247" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100247">47</a></sup> otherwise, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the skins will be destroyed. Instead new wine is poured into new wineskins.”<sup><a id="n4100248" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100248">48</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Lord of the Sabbath </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:23</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100249" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100249">49</a></sup> was going through the grain fields on a Sabbath, and his disciples began to pick some heads of wheat<sup><a id="n4100250" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100250">50</a></sup> as they made their way. <span class="verse">2:24</span> So<sup><a id="n4100251" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100251">51</a></sup> the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4100252" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100252">52</a></sup> said to him, “Look, why are they doing what is against the law on the Sabbath?” <span class="verse">2:25</span> He said to them, “Have you never read what David did when he was in need and he and his companions were hungry— <span class="verse">2:26</span> how he entered the house of God when Abiathar was high priest<sup><a id="n4100253" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100253">53</a></sup> and ate the sacred bread,<sup><a id="n4100254" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100254">54</a></sup> which is against the law<sup><a id="n4100255" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100255">55</a></sup> for any but the priests to eat, and also gave it to his companions?”<sup><a id="n4100256" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100256">56</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:27</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100257" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100257">57</a></sup> he said to them, “The Sabbath was made for people,<sup><a id="n4100258" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100258">58</a></sup> not people for the Sabbath. <span class="verse">2:28</span> For this reason the Son of Man is lord<sup><a id="n4100259" href="file1000_notes.xhtml#n4100259">59</a></sup> even of the Sabbath.” </p>

</body>
</html>