<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 27</h2>
<p id="n440271"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n440271">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> This marks the beginning of one of the “<i>we</i>” sections in Acts (16:10-17; 20:5-15; 21:1-18; 27:1-28:16). These have been traditionally understood to mean that the author was in the company of Paul for this part of the journey.</p></p>
<p id="n440272"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n440272">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Sail to Italy</i>. This voyage with its difficulty serves to show how God protected Paul on his long journey to Rome. From the perspective of someone in Palestine, this may well picture “the end of the earth” quite literally (cf. Acts 1:8).</p></p>
<p id="n440273"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n440273">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n440274"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n440274">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to BDAG 917 s.v. <span class="greek">σεβαστός</span>, “In <span class="greek">σπεῖρα Σεβαστή</span> 27:1 (cp. OGI 421) <span class="greek">Σεβαστή</span> is likew. an exact transl. of Lat. Augusta, an honorary title freq. given to auxiliary troops (Ptolem. renders it <span class="greek">Σεβαστή</span> in connection w. three legions that bore it: 2, 3, 30; 2, 9, 18; 4, 3, 30) <i>imperial cohort</i>.” According to W. Foerster (<i>TDNT</i> 7:175), “In Ac. 27:1 the <span class="greek">σπεῖρα Σεβαστή</span> is an expression also found elsewhere for ‘auxiliary troops.’” In no case would this refer to a special imperial bodyguard, and to translate “imperial regiment” or “imperial cohort” might give this impression. There is some archaeological evidence for a <i>Cohors Augusta I</i> stationed in Syria during the time of Augustus, but whether this is the same unit is very debatable.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The Augustan Cohort</i>. A <i>cohort</i> was a Roman military unit of about 600 soldiers, one-tenth of a legion. There is considerable debate over the identification of this particular cohort and the meaning of the title <i>Augustan</i> mentioned here. These may well have been auxiliary (provincial) troops given the honorary title.</p></p>
<p id="n440275"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n440275">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Going on board.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιβάντες</span> (<span class="translit">epibantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n440276"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n440276">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Adramyttium</i> was a seaport in Mysia on the western coast of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n440277"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n440277">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “places.”</p></p>
<p id="n440278"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n440278">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n440279"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n440279">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4 states, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Although not explicitly stated, the ship <i>put out to sea</i> from the port of Caesarea (where the previous events had taken place (cf. 25:13) and then sailed along the Asiatic coast (the first stop was <i>Sidon</i>, v. 3).</p></p>
<p id="n4402710"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402710">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>A Macedonian</i>. The city of Thessalonica (modern Salonica) was in the Roman province of Macedonia in Greece.</p></p>
<p id="n4402712"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402712">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 516 s.v. <span class="greek">κατάγω</span> states, “Hence the pass., in act. sense, of ships and seafarers <i>put in</i> <span class="greek">εἴς τι</span> <i>at a harbor</i>…<span class="greek">εἰς Σιδῶνα</span> Ac 27:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402713"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402713">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Sidon</i> is another seaport 75 mi (120 km) north of Caesarea.</p></p>
<p id="n4402714"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402714">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1056 s.v. <span class="greek">φιλανθρώπως</span> states, “<i>benevolently, kindly</i> <span class="greek">φιλανθρώπως χρῆσθαί</span> (<span class="greek">τινι</span>) <i>treat someone in kindly fashion</i>…Ac 27:3.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Treating Paul kindly</i>. Paul’s treatment followed the pattern of the earlier imprisonment (cf. Acts 24:23).</p></p>
<p id="n4402715"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402715">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to go to his friends to be cared for.” The scene is an indication of Christian hospitality.</p></p>
<p id="n4402716"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402716">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “putting out to sea.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναχθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">anachthentes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4 states, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402717"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402717">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1040 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑποπλέω</span> states, “<i>sail under the lee of</i> an island, i.e. in such a way that the island protects the ship fr. the wind Ac 27:4, 7.” Thus they were east and north of the island.</p></p>
<p id="n4402718"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402718">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the depths,” the deep area of a sea far enough from land that it is not protected by the coast (L&amp;N 1.73).</p></p>
<p id="n4402719"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402719">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Pamphylia</i> was a province in the southern part of Asia Minor; it was west of Cilicia (see BDAG 753 s.v. <span class="greek">Παμφυλία</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402720"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 531 s.v. <span class="greek">κατέρχομαι</span> 2 states, “Of ships and those who sail in them, who ‘come down’ fr. the ‘high seas’: <i>arrive, put in…</i><span class="greek">ἔις τι</span> <i>at someth</i>. a harbor 18:22; 21:3; 27:5.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402721"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402721">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Myra</i> was a city on the southern coast of Lycia in Asia Minor. This journey from Sidon (v. 3) was 440 mi (700 km) and took about 15 days.</p></p>
<p id="n4402722"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402722">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lycia</i> was the name of a peninsula on the southern coast of Asia Minor between Caria and Pamphylia.</p></p>
<p id="n4402723"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402723">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402724"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402724">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “finding.” The participle <span class="greek">εὑρών</span> (<span class="translit">heurōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402725"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402725">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Alexandria</i> (modern Alexandria) was a great city of northern Egypt which was a center for grain trade to Rome. Therefore this type of travel connection was common at the time. For a winter journey (considered hazardous) there were special bonuses and insurance provided (Suetonius, <i>Life of Claudius</i> 18.1-2).</p></p>
<p id="n4402726"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402726">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">βραδυπλοοῦντες</span> (<span class="translit">braduploountes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402727"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402727">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cnidus</i> was the name of a peninsula on the southwestern coast of Asia Minor. This was about 130 mi (210 km) from Myra.</p></p>
<p id="n4402728"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402728">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> This genitive absolute construction with <span class="greek">προσεῶντος</span> (<span class="translit">proseōntos</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle. L&amp;N 13.139 translates the phrase <span class="greek">μὴ προσεῶντος ἡμᾶς τοῦ ἀνέμου</span> (<span class="translit">mē proseōntos hēmas tou anemou</span>) as “the wind would not let us go any farther.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402729"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402729">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1040 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑποπλέω</span> states, “<i>sail under the lee of</i> an island, i.e. in such a way that the island protects the ship fr. the wind Ac 27:4, 7.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402730"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402730">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Salmone</i> was the name of a promontory on the northeastern corner of the island of <i>Crete</i>. This was about 100 mi (160 km) farther along.</p></p>
<p id="n4402731"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402731">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sailing along the coast…we came.” The participle <span class="greek">παραλεγόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">paralegomenoi</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. L&amp;N 54.8, “<span class="greek">παραλέγομαι</span>: (a technical, nautical term) to sail along beside some object—‘to sail along the coast, to sail along the shore.’…‘they sailed along the coast of Crete’ Ac 27:13.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402732"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402732">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it”; the referent (Crete) has been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402733"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402733">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lasea</i> was a city on the southern coast of the island of <i>Crete</i>. This was about 60 mi (96 km) farther.</p></p>
<p id="n4402734"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402734">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “unsafe” (BDAG 383 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπισφαλής</span>). The term is a NT <i>hapax legomenon</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4402735"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402735">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The fast</i> refers to the Jewish Day of Atonement, Yom Kippur. It was now into October and the dangerous winter winds would soon occur (Suetonius, <i>Life of Claudius</i> 18; Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 1.14.2-3 [1.279-281]).</p></p>
<p id="n4402736"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402736">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The accusative articular infinitive <span class="greek">παρεληλυθέναι</span> (<span class="translit">parelēluthenai</span>) after the preposition <span class="greek">διά</span> (<span class="translit">dia</span>) is causal. BDAG 776 s.v. <span class="greek">παρέρχομαι</span> 2 has “<span class="greek">διὰ τὸ τὴν νηστείαν ἤδη παρεληλυθέναι</span> <i>because the fast was already over</i> Ac 27:9.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402737"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402737">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul advised, saying to them.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated. On the term translated “advised,” see BDAG 764 s.v. <span class="greek">παραινέω</span>, which usually refers to recommendations.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Paul advised them</i>. A literary theme surfaces here: Though Paul is under arrest, he will be the one to guide them all through the dangers of the storm and shipwreck, showing clearly God’s presence and protection of him. The story is told in great detail. This literary effect of slowing down the passage of time and narrating with many details serves to add a sense of drama to the events described.</p></p>
<p id="n4402738"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402738">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is going to be with disaster.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402739"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402739">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “hardship,” “damage.” BDAG 1022 s.v. <span class="greek">ὕβρις</span> 3 states, “fig. <i>hardship, disaster, damage</i> caused by the elements…w. <span class="greek">ζημία</span> Ac 27:10.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402740"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402740">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “souls” (here, one’s physical life).</p></p>
<p id="n4402741"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402741">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402742"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402742">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “persuaded.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402743"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402743">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 456 s.v. <span class="greek">κυβερνήτης</span> 1 has “one who is responsible for the management of a ship, <i>shipmaster</i>…W. <span class="greek">ναύκληρος</span>, the ‘shipowner’…Ac 27:11” See further L. Casson, <i>Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World</i>, 316-18.</p></p>
<p id="n4402744"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402744">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “than by what was said by Paul.” The passive construction has been converted to an active one to simplify the translation.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>More convinced by the captain and the ship’s owner than by what Paul said</i>. The position taken by the centurion was logical, since he was following “professional” advice. But this was not a normal voyage.</p></p>
<p id="n4402745"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402745">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 181-82 s.v. <span class="greek">βουλή</span> 2.a, “<span class="greek">β</span>.<span class="greek"> τίθεσθαι</span> (Judg 19:30; Ps 12:3) <i>decide</i> 27:12 (w. inf. foll.).”</p></p>
<p id="n4402746"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402746">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402747"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402747">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from there, if somehow” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was begun here in the translation and the introductory phrase “They hoped that” supplied (with the subject, “they,” repeated from the previous clause) to make a complete English sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n4402748"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402748">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if somehow, reaching Phoenix, they could…” The participle <span class="greek">καταντήσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">katantēsantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402749"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402749">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Phoenix</i> was a seaport on the southern coast of the island of <i>Crete</i>. This was about 30 mi (48 km) farther west.</p></p>
<p id="n4402750"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402750">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a harbor of Crete open to the southwest and northwest.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402751"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402751">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “thinking.” The participle <span class="greek">δόξαντες</span> (<span class="translit">doxantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402752"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402752">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “accomplish.” L&amp;N 68.29, for <span class="greek">κρατέω</span>, has “to be able to complete or finish, presumably despite difficulties—‘to accomplish, to do successfully, to carry out.’…‘thinking that they could carry out their purpose’ Ac 27:13.” </p></p>
<p id="n4402753"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402753">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “departed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402754"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402754">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 54.8, “<span class="greek">παραλέγομαι</span>: (a technical, nautical term) to sail along beside some object—‘to sail along the coast, to sail along the shore.’…‘they sailed along the coast of Crete’ Ac 27:13.” With the addition of the adverb <span class="greek">ἆσσον</span> (<span class="translit">asson</span>) this becomes “sailed close along the coast of Crete.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402755"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402755">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a wind like a typhoon.” That is, a very violent wind like a typhoon or hurricane (BDAG 1021 s.v. <span class="greek">τυφωνικός</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402756"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402756">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> Or <i>called Euraquilo</i> (the actual name of the wind, a sailor’s term which was a combination of Greek and Latin). According to Strabo (<i>Geography</i> 1.2.21), this was a violent northern wind.</p></p>
<p id="n4402757"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402757">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from it”; the referent (the island) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402758"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402758">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was forced off course.” <i>Grk</i> “The ship being caught in it.” The genitive absolute construction with the participle <span class="greek">συναρπασθέντος</span> (<span class="translit">sunarpasthentos</span>) has been taken temporally; it could also be translated as causal (“Because the ship was caught in it”).</p></p>
<p id="n4402759"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402759">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 91 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀντοφθαλμέω</span> states, “Metaph. of a ship <span class="greek">τοῦ πλοίου μὴ δυναμένοι ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τῷ ἀνέμῳ</span> <i>since the ship was not able to face the wind</i>, i.e. with its bow headed against the forces of the waves Ac 27:15.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402760"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402760">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> Caught in the violent wind, the ship was <i>driven along</i>. They were now out of control, at the mercy of the wind and sea.</p></p>
<p id="n4402761"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402761">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1042 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑποτρέχω</span> states, “<i>run</i> or <i>sail under the lee of</i>, nautical t.t.…Ac 27:16.” The participle <span class="greek">ὑποδραμόντες</span> (<span class="translit">hupodramontes</span>) has been taken temporally (“as we ran under the lee of”). While this could also be translated as a participle of means (“by running…”) this might suggest the ship was still under a greater degree of control by its crew than it probably was.</p></p>
<p id="n4402762"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402762">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cauda</i>. This island was located south of Crete, about 23 mi (36 km) from where they began. There are various ways to spell the island’s name (e.g., <i>Clauda</i>, BDAG 546 s.v. <span class="greek">Κλαῦδα</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402763"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402763">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>ship</i>’<i>s boat</i> was a small rowboat, normally towed behind a ship in good weather rather than stowed on board. It was used for landings, to maneuver the ship for tacking, and to lay anchors (not a lifeboat in the modern sense, although it could have served as a means of escape for some of the sailors; see v. 30). See L. Casson, <i>Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World</i>, 248f.</p></p>
<p id="n4402764"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402764">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “After hoisting it up, they…”; the referent (the ship’s crew) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402765"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402765">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἄραντες</span> (<span class="translit">arantes</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402766"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402766">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Possibly “ropes” or “cables”; <i>Grk</i> “helps” (a word of uncertain meaning; probably a nautical technical term, BDAG 180 s.v. <span class="greek">βοήθεια</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4402767"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402767">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 308 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐκπίπτω</span> 2 states, “<i>drift off course, run aground</i>, nautical term <span class="greek">εἴς τι</span> <i>on someth…</i>.on the Syrtis 27:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402768"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402768">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, on the sandbars and shallows of the Syrtis.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>On the Syrtis</i>. The <i>Syrtis</i> was the name of two gulfs on the North African coast (modern Libya), feared greatly by sailors because of their shifting sandbars and treacherous shallows. The <i>Syrtis</i> here is the so-called Great Syrtis, toward Cyrenaica. It had a horrible reputation as a sailors’ graveyard (Pliny, <i>Natural History</i> 5.26). Josephus (<i>J. W</i>. 2.16.4 [2.381]) says the name alone struck terror in those who heard it. It was near the famous Scylla and Charybdis mentioned in Homer’s <i>Odyssey</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4402769"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402769">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “mainsail.” The meaning of this word is uncertain. BDAG 927 s.v. <span class="greek">σκεῦος</span> 1 has “<span class="greek">τὸ σκεῦος</span> Ac 27:17 seems to be the <i>kedge</i> or <i>driving anchor</i>” while C. Maurer (<i>TDNT</i> 7:362) notes, “The meaning in Ac. 27:17: <span class="greek">χαλάσαντες τὸ σκεῦος</span>, is uncertain. Prob. the ref. is not so much to taking down the sails as to throwing the draganchor overboard to lessen the speed of the ship.” In spite of this L&amp;N 6.1 states, “In Ac 27:17, for example, the reference of <span class="greek">σκεῦος</span> is generally understood to be the mainsail.” A reference to the sail is highly unlikely because in a storm of the force described in Ac 27:14, the sail would have been taken down and reefed immediately, to prevent its being ripped to shreds or torn away by the gale.</p></p>
<p id="n4402770"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402770">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 980 s.v. <span class="greek">σφόδρῶς</span> states, “<i>very much, greatly,</i> violently…<span class="greek">σφ</span>.<span class="greek"> χειμάζεσθαι</span> <i>be violently beaten by a storm</i> Ac 27:18.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402771"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402771">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “jettisoning [the cargo]” (a nautical technical term). The words “the cargo” are not in the Greek text but are implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p><p><b>sn</b> The desperation of the sailors in <i>throwing the cargo overboard</i> is reminiscent of Jonah 1:5. At this point they were only concerned with saving themselves.</p></p>
<p id="n4402772"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402772">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rigging,” “tackle”; <i>Grk</i> “the ship’s things.” Here the more abstract “gear” is preferred to “rigging” or “tackle” as a translation for <span class="greek">σκεῦος</span> (<span class="translit">skeuos</span>) because in v. 40 the sailors are still able to raise the (fore)sail, which they could not have done if the ship’s rigging or tackle had been jettisoned here. </p></p>
<p id="n4402773"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402773">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “no small storm” = a very great storm.</p></p>
<p id="n4402774"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402774">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “no small storm pressing on us.” The genitive absolute construction with the participle <span class="greek">ἐπικειμένου</span> (<span class="translit">epikeimenou</span>) has been translated as parallel to the previous genitive absolute construction (which was translated as temporal). BDAG 373 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπίκειμαι</span> 2.b states, “of impersonal force <i>confront</i> <span class="greek">χειμῶνος ἐπικειμένου</span> <i>since a storm lay upon us</i> Ac 27:20.” L&amp;N 14.2, “‘the stormy weather did not abate in the least’ or ‘the violent storm continued’ Ac 27:20.” To this last was added the idea of “battering” from the notion of “pressing upon” inherent in <span class="greek">ἐπίκειμαι</span> (<span class="translit">epikeimai</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402775"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402775">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “finally all hope that we would be saved was abandoned.” The passive construction has been converted to an active one to simplify the translation. This represents a clearly secular use of the term <span class="greek">σῴζω</span> (<span class="translit">sōzō</span>) in that it refers to deliverance from the storm. At this point those on board the ship gave up hope of survival.</p></p>
<p id="n4402776"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402776">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Since they had no desire to eat for a long time.” The genitive absolute construction with the participle <span class="greek">ὑπαρχούσης</span> (<span class="translit">huparchousēs</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle. It could also be translated temporally (“When many of them had no desire to eat”). The translation of <span class="greek">πολλῆς</span> (<span class="translit">pollēs</span>) as a substantized adjective referring to the people on board the ship (“many of them”) rather than a period of time (“for a long time”; so most modern versions) follows BDAG 143 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀσιτία</span>, which has “<span class="greek">πολλῆς ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ὑπαρχούσης</span> <i>since almost nobody wanted to eat</i> because of anxiety or seasickness…Ac 27:21.” This detail indicates how turbulent things were on board the ship.</p></p>
<p id="n4402777"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402777">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">τότε</span> (<span class="translit">tote</span>) is redundant (pleonastic) according to BDAG 1012-13 s.v. <span class="greek">τότε</span> 2; thus it has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402778"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402778">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “standing up…said.” The participle <span class="greek">σταθείς</span> (<span class="translit">statheis</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402779"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402779">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 36.12 has “<span class="greek">πειθαρχήσαντάς μοι μὴ ἀνάγεσθαι ἀπὸ τῆς Κρήτης</span> ‘you should have listened to me and not have sailed from Crete’ Ac 27:21.”</p><p><b>sn</b> By saying “<i>you should have listened to me and not put out to sea from Crete</i>” Paul was not “rubbing it in,” but was reasserting his credibility before giving his next recommendation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402780"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402780">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402781"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402781">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> The infinitive <span class="greek">κερδῆσαι</span> (<span class="translit">kerdēsai</span>) has been translated as resultative.</p></p>
<p id="n4402782"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402782">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> The same verb is used for Paul’s original recommendation in Ac 27:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4402783"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402783">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “except the ship.” Here “but” is used to translate the improper preposition <span class="greek">πλήν</span> (<span class="translit">plēn</span>; see BDAG 826 s.v. <span class="greek">πλήν</span> 2) since an exception like this, where two different categories of objects are involved (people and a ship), is more naturally expressed in contemporary English with an adversative (“but”). The words “will be lost” are also supplied for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> The “prophecy” about the ship serves to underscore Paul’s credibility as an agent of God. Paul addressed his audience carefully and drew attention to the sovereign knowledge of God.</p></p>
<p id="n4402784"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402784">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of whom I am.” The relative clause was translated following L&amp;N 15.86 s.v. <span class="greek">παρίσταμαι</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4402785"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402785">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “worship.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402786"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402786">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “stood by me.” BDAG 778 s.v. <span class="greek">παρίστημι</span>/<span class="greek">παριστάνω</span> 2.a.<span class="greek">α</span> states, “<i>approach, come</i> <span class="greek">τινί</span> <i>(to) someone</i>…Ac 9:39; 27:23.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402787"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402787">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “came to me saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402788"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402788">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 778 s.v. <span class="greek">παρίστημι</span>/<span class="greek">παριστάνω</span> 2.a.<span class="greek">α</span> states, “Also as a t.t. of legal usage <i>appear before, come before</i>…<span class="greek">Καίσαρι σε δεῖ παραστῆναι</span> <i>you must stand before the Emperor</i> (as judge) Ac 27:24.” See Acts 23:11. Luke uses the verb <span class="greek">δεῖ</span> (<span class="translit">dei</span>) to describe what must occur.</p></p>
<p id="n4402789"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402789">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “before the emperor” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p></p>
<p id="n4402790"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402790">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God has graciously granted you all who are sailing with you.” The words “the safety of” have been supplied to clarify the meaning of the verb <span class="greek">κεχάρισται</span> (<span class="translit">kecharistai</span>) in this context.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The safety of all who are sailing with you</i>. In a sense, Paul’s presence protects them all. For Luke, it serves as a picture of what the gospel does through Christ and through the one who brings the message.</p></p>
<p id="n4402791"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402791">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 817 s.v. <span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> 1.c states, “w. pers. and thing added <span class="greek">π</span>.<span class="greek"> τινί τι</span> <i>believe someone with regard to someth</i>….W. dat. of pers. and <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> foll…. <span class="greek">πιστεύετέ μοι ὅτι ἐγὼ ἐν τῷ πατρί</span> J 14:11a. Cf. 4:21; Ac 27:25.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402792"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402792">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is another use of <span class="greek">δεῖ</span> (<span class="translit">dei</span>) to indicate necessity (see also v. 24). Acts 28:1 shows the fulfillment of this.</p></p>
<p id="n4402793"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402793">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here “being driven” has been used to translate <span class="greek">διαφέρω</span> (<span class="translit">diapherō</span>) rather than “drifting,” because it is clear from the attempt to drop anchors in v. 29 that the ship is still being driven by the gale. “Drifting” implies lack of control, but not necessarily rapid movement.</p></p>
<p id="n4402794"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402794">94</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Adriatic Sea</i>. They were now somewhere between Crete and Malta.</p></p>
<p id="n4402795"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402795">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “suspected that some land was approaching them.” BDAG 876 s.v. <span class="greek">προσάγω</span> 2.a states, “lit. <span class="greek">ὑπενόουν προσάγειν τινά αὐτοῖς χώραν</span> <i>they suspected that land was near</i> (lit. ‘approaching them’) Ac 27:27.” Current English idiom would speak of the ship approaching land rather than land approaching the ship.</p></p>
<p id="n4402796"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402796">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Heaving the lead, they found.” The participle <span class="greek">βολίσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">bolisantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. See also BDAG 180 s.v. <span class="greek">βολίζω</span>. Although the term is used twice in this verse (and thus is technically not a NT <i>hapax legomenon</i>), it occurs nowhere else in the NT.</p></p>
<p id="n4402797"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402797">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>fathom</i> is about 6 feet or just under 2 meters (originally the length of a man’s outstretched arms). This was a nautical technical term for measuring the depth of water. Here it was about 120 ft (36 m).</p></p>
<p id="n4402798"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402798">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 15.12, “<span class="greek">βραχὺ δὲ διαστήσαντες</span> ‘when they had gone a little farther’ Ac 27:28.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402799"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n4402799">99</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here the depth was about 90 ft (27 m).</p></p>
<p id="n44027100"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fearing.” The participle <span class="greek">φοβούμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">phoboumenoi</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n44027101"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “against a rough [rocky] place.” L&amp;N 79.84 has “<span class="greek">φοβούμενοί τε μή που κατὰ τραχεῖς τόποις ἐκπέσωμεν</span> ‘we were afraid that we would run aground on the rocky coast’ Ac 27:29.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027102"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “throwing out…they.” The participle <span class="greek">ῥίψαντες</span> (<span class="translit">rhipsantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44027103"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 417 s.v. <span class="greek">εὔχομαι</span> 2 states, “<i>wish</i>…<span class="greek">τὶ</span> <i>for someth</i>.…Foll. by acc. and inf….Ac 27:29.” The other possible meaning for this term, “pray,” is given in BDAG 417 s.v. 1 and employed by a number of translations (NAB, NRSV, NIV). If this meaning is adopted here, then “prayed for day to come” must be understood metaphorically to mean “prayed that they would live to see the day,” or “prayed that it would soon be day.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027104"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and wished for day to come about.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>And wished for day to appear</i>. The sailors were hoping to hold the ship in place until morning, when they could see what was happening and where they were.</p></p>
<p id="n44027105"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 889 s.v. <span class="greek">πρόφασις</span> 2 states, “<span class="greek">προφάσει ὡς</span> <i>under the pretext that, pretending that</i>…Ac 27:30.” In other words, some of the sailors gave up hope that such efforts would work and instead attempted to escape while pretending to help.</p></p>
<p id="n44027106"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027106">106</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n44027107"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> The pronoun <i>you</i> is plural in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n44027108"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027108">108</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The soldiers cut the ropes</i>. The centurion and the soldiers were now following Paul’s advice by cutting the ropes to prevent the sailors from escaping.</p></p>
<p id="n44027109"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “let it fall away.” According to BDAG 308 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐκπίπτω</span> 1 and 2 the meaning of the verb in this verse could be either “fall away” or “drift away.” Either meaning is acceptable, and the choice between them depends almost entirely on how one reconstructs the scene. Since cutting the boat loose would in any case result in it drifting away (whether capsized or not), the meaning “drift away” as a nautical technical term has been used here.</p></p>
<p id="n44027110"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 160 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄχρι</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span> has “<span class="greek">ἄ</span>.<span class="greek"> οὗ ἡμέρα ἤμελλεν γίνεσθαι</span> <i>until the day began to dawn</i> 27:33.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027111"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “have waited anxiously.” <i>Grk</i> “waiting anxiously.” The participle <span class="greek">προσδοκῶντες</span> (<span class="translit">prosdokōntes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44027112"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “continued.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027113"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having eaten nothing.” The participle <span class="greek">προσλαβόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">proslabomenoi</span>) has been translated as a finite verb (with subject “you” supplied) due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44027114"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “necessary.” BDAG 873-74 s.v. <span class="greek">πρός</span> 1 has “<span class="greek">πρ</span>.<span class="greek"> τῆς σωτηρίας</span> <i>in the interest of safety</i> Ac 27:34”; L&amp;N 27.18 has “‘therefore, I urge you to take some food, for this is important for your deliverance’ or ‘…for your survival’ Ac 27:34.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027115"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “deliverance” (‘salvation’ in a nontheological sense).</p></p>
<p id="n44027116"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44027117"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “taking bread, gave thanks.” The participle <span class="greek">λαβών</span> (<span class="translit">labōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44027118"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “before them all,” but here this could be misunderstood to indicate a temporal sequence.</p></p>
<p id="n44027119"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and breaking it, he began.” The participle <span class="greek">κλάσας</span> (<span class="translit">klasas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44027120"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027120">120</a> <p><b>tc</b> One early ms (B) and an early version (sa) read “about seventy-six.” For discussion of how this variant probably arose, see F. F. Bruce, <i>The Acts of the Apostles</i>, 465.</p></p>
<p id="n44027121"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027121">121</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n44027122"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “When they had eaten their fill.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027123"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “grain.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027124"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “observed,” “saw.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027125"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “gulf” (BDAG 557 s.v. <span class="greek">κόλπος</span> 3).</p></p>
<p id="n44027126"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027126">126</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>A beach</i> would refer to a smooth sandy beach suitable for landing.</p></p>
<p id="n44027127"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, released. <i>Grk</i> “slipping…leaving.” The participles <span class="greek">περιελόντες</span> (<span class="translit">perielontes</span>) and <span class="greek">εἴων</span> (<span class="translit">eiōn</span>) have been translated as finite verbs due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44027128"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term is used of a ship’s anchor. (BDAG 12 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄγκυρα</span> a).</p></p>
<p id="n44027129"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “bands”; possibly “ropes.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027130"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rudders.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027131"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hoisting…they.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπάραντες</span> (<span class="translit">eparantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44027132"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sail”; probably a reference to the foresail.</p></p>
<p id="n44027133"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 533 s.v. <span class="greek">κατέχω</span> 7 states, “<i>hold course,</i> nautical t.t., intr….<span class="greek">κατεῖχον εἰς τὸν αἰγιαλόν</span> <i>they headed for the beach</i> Ac 27:40.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027134"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fell upon a place of two seas.” The most common explanation for this term is that it refers to a reef or sandbar with the sea on both sides, as noted in BDAG 245 s.v. <span class="greek">διθάλασσος</span>: the “<span class="greek">τόπος δ</span>. Ac 27:41 is a semantic unit signifying a point (of land jutting out with water on both sides).” However, Greek had terms for a “sandbank” (<span class="greek">θῖς</span> [<span class="translit">this</span>], <span class="greek">ταινία</span> [<span class="translit">tainia</span>]), a “reef” (<span class="greek">ἑρμα</span> [<span class="translit">herma</span>]), “strait” (<span class="greek">στενόν</span> [<span class="translit">stenon</span>]), “promontory” (<span class="greek">ἀρωτήρον</span> [<span class="translit">arōtēron</span>]), and other nautical hazards, none of which are used by the author here. NEB here translates <span class="greek">τόπον διθάλασσον</span> (<span class="translit">topon dithalasson</span>) as “cross-currents,” a proposal close to that advanced by J. M. Gilchrist, “The Historicity of Paul’s Shipwreck,” <i>JSNT</i> 61 (1996): 29-51, who suggests the meaning is “a patch of cross-seas,” where the waves are set at an angle to the wind, a particular hazard for sailors. Thus the term most likely refers to some sort of adverse sea conditions rather than a topographical feature like a reef or sandbar.</p></p>
<p id="n44027135"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “violence” (BDAG 175 s.v. <span class="greek">βία</span> a).</p></p>
<p id="n44027136"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027136">136</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The soldiers’ plan was to kill the prisoners</i>. The issue here was not cruelty, but that the soldiers would be legally responsible if any prisoners escaped and would suffer punishment themselves. So they were planning to do this as an act of self-preservation. See Acts 16:27 for a similar incident.</p></p>
<p id="n44027137"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἐκκολυμβήσας</span> (<span class="translit">ekkolumbēsas</span>) has been taken instrumentally.</p></p>
<p id="n44027138"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027138">138</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n44027139"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027139">139</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “wanting to rescue Paul.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Thanks to the <i>centurion</i> who wanted <i>to save Paul’s life</i>, Paul was once more rescued from a potential human threat.</p></p>
<p id="n44027140"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 347 s.v. I. <span class="greek">ἔξειμι</span> has “<span class="greek">ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν</span> <i>get to land</i> Ac 27:43.”</p></p>
<p id="n44027141"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027141">141</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “were to follow” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. They must be supplied to clarify the sense in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n44027142"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027142">142</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “boards” according to BDAG 913 s.v. <span class="greek">σανίς</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n44027143"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027143">143</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on pieces from the ship”; that is, pieces of wreckage from the ship.</p><p><b>sn</b> Both the <i>planks</i> and <i>pieces of the ship</i> were for the weak or nonswimmers. The whole scene is a historical metaphor representing how listening to Paul and his message could save people.</p></p>
<p id="n44027144"><a href="file1089.xhtml#n44027144">144</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And in this way it happened that.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
