<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 17</h2>
<p id="n400171"><a href="file986.xhtml#n400171">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after six days.”</p></p>
<p id="n400172"><a href="file986.xhtml#n400172">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “John his brother” with “his” referring to James.</p></p>
<p id="n400173"><a href="file986.xhtml#n400173">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> In 1st century Judaism and in the NT, it was believed that the righteous would be given new, glorified bodies in order to enter heaven (cf. 1 Cor 15:42-49; 2 Cor 5:1-10). This transformation meant that the righteous will share the glory of God. The account of Jesus’ transfiguration here recalls the way Moses shared the Lord’s glory after his visit to the mountain in Exod 34:28-35. So the disciples saw Jesus <i>transfigured</i>, and they were getting a private preview of the great glory that Jesus would have following his exaltation.</p></p>
<p id="n400174"><a href="file986.xhtml#n400174">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400175"><a href="file986.xhtml#n400175">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold, Moses.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n400176"><a href="file986.xhtml#n400176">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> Commentators and scholars discuss why <i>Moses and Elijah</i> are present. The most likely explanation is that Moses represents the prophetic office (Acts 3:18-22) and Elijah pictures the presence of the last days (Mal 4:5-6), the prophet of the eschaton (the end times).</p></p>
<p id="n400177"><a href="file986.xhtml#n400177">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that the appearance of Moses and Elijah prompted Peter’s comment.</p></p>
<p id="n400178"><a href="file986.xhtml#n400178">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Peter answering said.” This construction is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n400179"><a href="file986.xhtml#n400179">9</a> <p><b>tc</b> Instead of the singular future indicative <span class="greek">ποιήσω</span> (<span class="translit">poiēsō</span>, “I will make”), most witnesses (C<sup>3</sup> D L W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> [<span class="greek">Φ</span>] 0281 ƒ<sup>[1],13</sup> 33 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy co) have the plural aorist subjunctive <span class="greek">ποιήσωμεν</span> (<span class="translit">poiēsōmen</span>, “let us make”). But since <span class="greek">ποιήσωμεν</span> is the reading found in the parallel accounts in Mark and Luke, it is likely a motivated reading. Further, the earliest and best witnesses, as well as a few others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C* 700* as well as some versional and patristic witnesses) have <span class="greek">ποιήσω</span>. It is thus more likely that the singular verb is authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n4001710"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001710">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “booths,” “dwellings” (referring to the temporary booths constructed in the celebration of the feast of Tabernacles).</p><p><b>sn</b> Peter apparently wanted to celebrate the feast of Tabernacles or Booths that looked forward to the end and wanted to treat Moses, Elijah, and Jesus as equals by making <i>three shelters</i> (one for each). It was actually a way of expressing honor to Jesus, but the next verse makes it clear that it was not enough honor.</p></p>
<p id="n4001711"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001711">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold, a.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated here or in the following clause because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4001712"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001712">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>cloud</i> is the cloud of God’s presence and the voice is his as well.</p></p>
<p id="n4001713"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001713">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “surrounded.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001714"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001714">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold, a voice from the cloud, saying.” This is an incomplete sentence in Greek which portrays intensity and emotion. The participle <span class="greek">λέγουσα</span> (<span class="translit">legousa</span>) was translated as a finite verb in keeping with English style. </p></p>
<p id="n4001715"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001715">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my beloved Son,” or “my Son, the beloved [one].” The force of <span class="greek">ἀγαπητός</span> (<span class="translit">agapētos</span>) is often “pertaining to one who is the only one of his or her class, but at the same time is particularly loved and cherished” (L&amp;N 58.53; cf. also BDAG 7 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4001716"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001716">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>listen to him</i> comes from Deut 18:15 and makes two points: 1) Jesus is a prophet like Moses, a leader-prophet, and 2) they have much yet to learn from him.</p></p>
<p id="n4001717"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001717">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they fell down on their faces.” BDAG 815 s.v. <span class="greek">πίπτω</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span>. has “<i>fall down, throw oneself to the ground</i> as a sign of devotion, before high-ranking persons or divine beings.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001718"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001718">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001719"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001719">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus commanded them, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001720"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “asked him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001721"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001721">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “do the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4001722"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001722">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, he said.” This has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4001723"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001723">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001724"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001724">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001725"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001725">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he is moonstruck,” possibly meaning “lunatic” (so NAB, NASB), although now the term is generally regarded as referring to some sort of seizure disorder such as epilepsy (L&amp;N 23.169; BDAG 919 s.v. <span class="greek">σεληνιάζομαι</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4001726"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001726">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4001727"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001727">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, Jesus said.” This is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4001728"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001728">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O.” The marker of direct address, <span class="greek">ὦ</span> (<span class="translit">ō</span>), is functionally equivalent to a vocative and is represented in the translation by “you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001729"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001729">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faithless.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The rebuke for lack of faith has OT roots: Num 14:27; Deut 32:5, 20; Isa 59:8.</p></p>
<p id="n4001730"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001730">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “put up with.” See Num 11:12; Isa 46:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4001731"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001731">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> The pronouns <i>you…you</i> are plural, indicating that Jesus is speaking to a group rather than an individual.</p></p>
<p id="n4001732"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001732">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001733"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001733">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “commanded” (often with the implication of a threat, L&amp;N 33.331).</p></p>
<p id="n4001734"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001734">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “coming, the disciples said.” The participle <span class="greek">προσελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">proselthontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb to make the sequence of events clear in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4001735"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001735">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.” Here <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001736"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001736">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “faith as,” “faith like.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001737"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001737">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001738"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001738">38</a> <p><b>tc</b> Many significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B <span class="greek">Θ</span> 0281 33 579 892* e ff<sup>1</sup> sy<sup>s,c</sup> sa) do not include <b>17:21</b> “But this kind does not go out except by prayer and fasting.” The verse is included in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> C D L W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> lat sy<sup>(p),h</sup>, but is almost certainly not original. As Metzger notes, “Since there is no satisfactory reason why the passage, if originally present in Matthew, should have been omitted in a wide variety of witnesses, and since copyists frequently inserted material derived from another Gospel, it appears that most manuscripts have been assimilated to the parallel in Mk 9.29” (<i>TCGNT</i> 35). The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number as well, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n4001739"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001739">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001740"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001740">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>) is considered by some to be used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women (cf. NRSV “into human hands”; CEV “to people”). However, because this can be taken as a specific reference to the group responsible for Jesus’ arrest, where it is unlikely women were present (cf. Matt 26:47-56; Mark 14:43-52; Luke 22:47-53; John 18:2-12), the word “men” has been retained in the translation. There may also be a slight wordplay with “the Son of Man” earlier in the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4001741"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001741">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001742"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001742">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Capernaum</i> was a town located on the northwest shore of the Sea of Galilee, 680 ft (204 m) below sea level. It existed since Hasmonean times and was a major trade and economic center in the North Galilean region. The population in the first century is estimated to be around 1,500. Capernaum became the hub of operations for Jesus’ Galilean ministry (Matt 4:13; Mark 2:1). In modern times the site was discovered in 1838 by the American explorer E. Robinson, and major excavations began in 1905 by German archaeologists H. Kohl and C. Watzinger. Not until 1968, however, were remains from the time of Jesus visible; in that year V. Corbo and S. Loffreda began a series of annual archaeological campaigns that lasted until 1985. This work uncovered what is thought to be the house of Simon Peter as well as ruins of the first century synagogue beneath the later synagogue from the fourth or fifth century A.D. Today gently rolling hills and date palms frame the first century site, a favorite tourist destination of visitors to the Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n4001743"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001743">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Collectors of the double drachma.” This is a case of metonymy, where the coin formerly used to pay the tax (the double drachma coin, or <span class="greek">δίδραχμον</span> [<span class="translit">didrachmon</span>]) was put for the tax itself (cf. BDAG 241 s.v.). Even though this coin was no longer in circulation in NT times and other coins were used to pay the tax, the name for the coin was still used to refer to the tax itself.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The temple tax</i> refers to the half-shekel tax paid annually by male Jews to support the temple (Exod 30:13-16).</p></p>
<p id="n4001744"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001744">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “spoke first to him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001745"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001745">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>their sons</i> may mean “their citizens,” but the term “sons” has been retained here in order to preserve the implicit comparison between the Father and his Son, Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4001746"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001746">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the phrase <i>their sons</i> in the previous verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4001747"><a href="file986.xhtml#n4001747">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>four drachma coin</i> was a stater (<span class="greek">στατήρ</span>, <span class="translit">statēr</span>), a silver coin worth four drachmas. One drachma was equivalent to one denarius, the standard pay for a day’s labor (L&amp;N 6.80).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
