<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 16</h2>
<p id="n400161"><a href="file985.xhtml#n400161">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n400162"><a href="file985.xhtml#n400162">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Sadducees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n400163"><a href="file985.xhtml#n400163">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> The object of the participle <span class="greek">πειράζοντες</span> (<span class="translit">peirazontes</span>) is not given in the Greek text but has been supplied here for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n400164"><a href="file985.xhtml#n400164">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> What exactly this <i>sign</i> would have been, given what Jesus was already doing, is not clear. But here is where the fence-sitters reside, refusing to commit to him.</p></p>
<p id="n400165"><a href="file985.xhtml#n400165">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But answering, he said to them.” The construction has been simplified in the translation and <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400166"><a href="file985.xhtml#n400166">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “red and gloomy” (L&amp;N 14.56).</p></p>
<p id="n400167"><a href="file985.xhtml#n400167">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The face of the sky you know how to discern.”</p></p>
<p id="n400168"><a href="file985.xhtml#n400168">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n400169"><a href="file985.xhtml#n400169">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4001610"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001610">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Sadducees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4001611"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Jesus’ saying about the Pharisees and Sadducees.</p></p>
<p id="n4001612"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “becoming aware of it.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001613"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “discussing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001614"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001616"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he asked his disciples, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has been left untranslated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001617"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001617">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> The appearance of <i>Elijah</i> would mean that the end time had come. According to 2 Kgs 2:11, Elijah was still alive. In Mal 4:5 it is said that Elijah would be the precursor of Messiah.</p></p>
<p id="n4001618"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, Simon Peter said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001619"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4001620"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, Jesus said to him.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> (<span class="translit">apokritheis</span>) is redundant, but the syntax of this phrase has been modified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4001621"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression “flesh and blood” could refer to “any human being” (so TEV, NLT; cf. NIV “man”), but it could also refer to Peter himself (i.e., his own intuition; cf. CEV “You didn’t discover this on your own”). Because of the ambiguity of the referent, the phrase “flesh and blood” has been retained in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n4001622"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001622">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the power of death” (taking the reference to the gates of Hades as a metonymy).</p><p><b>sn</b> In the OT, <i>Hades</i> was known as <i>Sheol</i>. It is the place where the unrighteous will reside (Matt 11:23; Luke 16:23; Rev 20:13-14). Some translations render this by its modern equivalent, “hell”; others see it as a reference to the power of death.</p></p>
<p id="n4001623"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001623">23</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> C W <span class="greek">Γ</span> 579 1241 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat bo) have “Jesus, the Christ” (<span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς ὁ Χριστός</span>, <span class="translit">Iēsous ho Christos</span>) here, while D has “Christ Jesus” (<span class="greek">ὁ Χριστὸς ᾿Ιησοῦς</span>). On the one hand, this is a much harder reading than the mere <span class="greek">Χριστός</span>, because the name Jesus was already well known for the disciples’ master—both to them and to others. Whether he was the Messiah is the real focus of the passage. But the addition of “Jesus” is surely too hard a reading: There are no other texts in which the Lord tells his disciples not to disclose his personal name. Further, it is plainly a motivated reading in that scribes had the proclivity to add <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span> to <span class="greek">Χριστός</span> or to <span class="greek">κύριος</span> (<span class="translit">kurios</span>, “Lord”), regardless of whether such was appropriate to the context. In this instance it clearly is not, and it only reveals that scribes sometimes, if not often, did not think about the larger interpretive consequences of their alterations to the text. Further, the shorter reading is well supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B L <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 565 700 1424 it sa.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4001624"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “From then.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001626"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001626">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> The necessity that the Son of Man <i>suffer</i> is the particular point that needed emphasis since for many 1st century Jews the Messiah was a glorious and powerful figure, not a suffering one.</p></p>
<p id="n4001627"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4001628"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001628">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “began to rebuke him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001629"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001629">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Merciful to you.” A highly elliptical expression: “May God be merciful to you in sparing you from having to undergo [some experience]” (L&amp;N 88.78). A contemporary English equivalent is “God forbid!”</p></p>
<p id="n4001630"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “people.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001631"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001631">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to come after me.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001632"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> This translation better expresses the force of the Greek third person imperative than the traditional “let him deny,” which could be understood as merely permissive.</p></p>
<p id="n4001633"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001633">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> To bear the cross means to accept the rejection of the world for turning to Jesus and following him. Discipleship involves a death that is like a crucifixion; see Gal 6:14.</p></p>
<p id="n4001634"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001634">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “soul” (throughout vv. 25-26). See the discussion of this Greek term in the note on “life” in Matt 10:39.</p></p>
<p id="n4001635"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001635">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek word translated <i>life</i> can refer to both earthly, physical life and inner, transcendent life (one’s “soul”). In the context, if a person is not willing to suffer the world’s rejection and persecution in order to follow Jesus but instead seeks to retain his physical life, then that person will <i>lose</i> both physical life and inner, transcendent life (at the judgment). On the other hand, the one who willingly gives up earthly, physical life to follow Jesus (“loses his life because of me”) will ultimately <i>find</i> one’s “soul” (note that the parallel in John’s Gospel speaks of “guarding one’s ‘soul’ for eternal life” (John 12:25).</p></p>
<p id="n4001636"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001636">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for my sake.” The traditional rendering “for my sake” can be understood in the sense of “for my benefit,” but the Greek term <span class="greek">ἕνεκα</span> (<i>heneka</i>) indicates the cause or reason for something (BDAG 334 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4001637"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001637">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a man,” but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used in a generic sense here to refer to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n4001638"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001638">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Pss 28:4; 62:12; cf. Prov 24:12.</p></p>
<p id="n4001639"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001639">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001640"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001640">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek negative here (<span class="greek">οὐ μή</span>, <span class="translit">ou mē</span>) is the strongest possible.</p></p>
<p id="n4001641"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001641">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will not taste.” Here the Greek verb does not mean “sample a small amount” (as a typical English reader might infer from the word “taste”), but “experience something cognitively or emotionally; come to know something” (cf. BDAG 195 s.v. <span class="greek">γεύομαι</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4001642"><a href="file985.xhtml#n4001642">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> Several suggestions have been made as to the referent for the phrase <i>the Son of Man coming in his kingdom</i>: (1) the transfiguration itself, which immediately follows in the narrative; (2) Jesus’ resurrection and ascension; (3) the coming of the Spirit; (4) Christ’s role in the Church; (5) the destruction of Jerusalem; (6) Jesus’ second coming and the establishment of the kingdom. The reference to <i>six days later</i> in 17:1 seems to indicate that Matthew had the transfiguration in mind insofar as it was a substantial prefiguring of the consummation of the kingdom (although this interpretation is not without its problems). As such, the transfiguration would be a tremendous confirmation to the disciples that even though Jesus had just finished speaking of his death (in vv. 21-23), he was nonetheless the promised Messiah and things were proceeding according to God’s plan.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
