<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Colossians 2</h2>
<p id="n510021"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n510021">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I want you to know how hard I am working for you…”</p></p>
<p id="n510022"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n510022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as many as have not seen my face in the flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n510023"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n510023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Verse two begins a subordinate <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clause which was divided up into two sentences for the sake of clarity in English. Thus the phrase “My goal is that” is an attempt to reflect in the translation the purpose expressed through the <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> clauses. </p></p>
<p id="n510024"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n510024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 956 s.v. <span class="greek">συμβιβάζω</span> 1.b reads “<i>unite, knit together</i>.” Some commentators take the verb as a reference to instruction, “instructed in love.” See P. T. O’Brien, <i>Colossians</i>, <i>Philemon</i> (WBC), 93.</p></p>
<p id="n510025"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n510025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “and that” translates the first <span class="greek">εἰς</span> (<span class="translit">eis</span>) clause of v. 2 and reflects the second goal of Paul’s striving and struggle for the Colossians—the first is “encouragement” and the second is “full assurance.”</p></p>
<p id="n510026"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n510026">6</a> <p><b>tc</b> There are at least a dozen variants here, almost surely generated by the unusual wording <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span>, <span class="greek">Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou theou, Christou</span>, “of God, [namely,] Christ”; so <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B Hil). Scribes would be prone to conform this to more common Pauline expressions such as “of God, who is in Christ” (33), “of God, the Father of Christ” (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A C 048<sup>vid</sup> 1175 bo), and “of the God and Father of Christ” (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 365 945 1505). Several witnesses, especially later Byzantines, read “of the God and Father, and of Christ” (D<sup>2</sup> K L 075 [0208 0278] <span class="apparatus">M</span>). Even though the external support for the wording <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span>, <span class="greek">Χριστοῦ</span> is hardly overwhelming, it clearly best explains the rise of the other readings and should thus be regarded as authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n510027"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n510027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 812 s.v. <span class="greek">πιθανολογία</span> states, “<i>persuasive speech, art of persuasion</i> (so Pla., Theaet. 162e) in an unfavorable sense in its only occurrence in our lit. <span class="greek">ἐν πιθανολογίᾳ</span> <i>by specious arguments</i> Col 2:4 (cp. PLips 40 III, 7 <span class="greek">διὰ πιθανολογίας</span>).”</p></p>
<p id="n510028"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n510028">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul’s point is that even though the <i>arguments</i> seem to make sense (<i>sound reasonable</i>), they are in the end false. Paul is not here arguing against the study of philosophy or serious thinking per se, but is arguing against the uncritical <i>adoption</i> of a philosophy that is at odds with a proper view of Christ and the ethics of the Christian life.</p></p>
<p id="n510029"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n510029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The conditional particle <span class="greek">εἰ</span> (<span class="translit">ei</span>) together with <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) here indicates a first class condition in Greek and carries a concessive force, especially when seen in contrast to the following phrase which begins with <span class="greek">ἀλλά</span> (<span class="translit">alla</span>). </p></p>
<p id="n5100210"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “rejoicing and seeing.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100211"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">τάξις</span> can mean “order,” “discipline,” or even “unbroken ranks” (REB).</p></p>
<p id="n5100212"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though the verb <span class="greek">παρελάβετε</span> (<span class="translit">parelabete</span>) does not often take a double accusative, here it seems to do so. Both <span class="greek">τὸν Χριστὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν</span> (<span class="translit">ton Christon Iēsoun</span>) and <span class="greek">τὸν κύριον</span> (<span class="translit">ton kurion</span>) are equally definite insofar as they both have an article, but both the word order and the use of “Christ Jesus” as a proper name suggest that it is the object (cf. Rom 10:9, 10). Thus Paul is affirming that the tradition that was delivered to the Colossians by Epaphras was Christ-centered and focused on him as Lord. </p></p>
<p id="n5100213"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The present imperative <span class="greek">περιπατεῖτε</span> (<span class="translit">peripateite</span>) implies, in this context, a continuation of something already begun. This is evidenced by the fact that Paul has already referred to their faith as “orderly” and “firm” (2:5), despite the struggles of some of them with this deceptive heresy (cf. 2:16-23). The verb is used literally to refer to a person “walking” and is thus used metaphorically (i.e., ethically) to refer to the way a person lives his or her life.</p></p>
<p id="n5100214"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “having been rooted.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100215"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100215">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> The three participles <i>rooted</i>, <i>built up</i>, and <i>firm</i> belong together and reflect three different metaphors. The first participle “<i>rooted</i>” (perfect tense) indicates a settled condition on the part of the Colossian believers and refers to horticulture. The second participle “<i>built up</i>” (present passive) comes from the world of architecture. The third participle “<i>firm</i> [established]” (present passive) comes from the law courts. With these three metaphors (as well as the following comment on thankfulness) Paul explains what he means when he commands them to continue to live their lives in Christ. The use of the passive probably reflects God’s activity among them. It was he who had rooted them, had been building them up, and had established them in the faith (cf. 1 Cor 3:5-15 for the use of mixed metaphors). </p></p>
<p id="n5100216"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the.” The Greek text has the article <span class="greek">τῇ</span> (<span class="translit">tē</span>), not the possessive pronoun <span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">humōn</span>), but the article often functions as a possessive pronoun and was translated as such here (<i>ExSyn</i> 215). </p></p>
<p id="n5100217"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek construction here is somewhat difficult and can be literally rendered “Be careful, lest someone shall be the one who takes you captive.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100218"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek reads <span class="greek">τῆς φιλοσοφίας καὶ κενῆς ἀπάτης</span> (<span class="translit">tēs philosophias kai kenēs apatēs</span>). The two nouns <span class="greek">φιλοσοφίας</span> and <span class="greek">ἀπάτης</span> are joined by one article and probably form a hendiadys. Thus the second noun was taken as modifying the first, as the translation shows. </p></p>
<p id="n5100219"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase <span class="greek">κατὰ τὰ στοιχεῖα τοῦ κόσμου</span> (<span class="translit">kata ta stoicheia tou kosmou</span>) is difficult to translate because of problems surrounding the precise meaning of <span class="greek">στοιχεῖα</span> in this context. Originally it referred to the letters of the alphabet, with the idea at its root of “things in a row”; see C. Vaughn, “Colossians,” <i>EBC</i> 11:198. M. J. Harris (<i>Colossians and Philemon</i> [EGGNT], 93) outlines three probable options: (1) the material elements which comprise the physical world; (2) the elementary teachings of the world (so NEB, NASB, NIV); (3) the elemental spirits of the world (so NEB, RSV). The first option is highly unlikely because Paul is not concerned here with the physical elements, e.g., carbon or nitrogen. The last two options are both possible. Though the Gnostic-like heresy at Colossae would undoubtedly have been regarded by Paul as an “elementary teaching” at best, because the idea of “spirits” played such a role in Gnostic thought, he may very well have had in mind elemental spirits that operated in the world or controlled the world (i.e., under God’s authority and permission).</p></p>
<p id="n5100220"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100220">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>In him all the fullness of deity lives</i>. The present tense in this verse (“<i>lives</i>”) is significant. Again, as was stated in the note on 1:19, this is not a temporary dwelling, but a permanent one. Paul’s point is polemical against the idea that the fullness of God dwells anywhere else, as the Gnostics believed, except in Christ alone. At the incarnation, the second person of the Trinity assumed humanity, and is forever the God-man.</p></p>
<p id="n5100221"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The terms “however” and “but” in this sentence were supplied in order to emphasize the contrast. </p></p>
<p id="n5100222"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The articular noun <span class="greek">τῇ ἀπεκδύσει</span> (<span class="translit">tē apekdusei</span>) is a noun which ends in -<span class="greek">σις</span> (<span class="translit">-sis</span>) and therefore denotes action, i.e., “removal.” Since the head noun is a verbal noun, the following genitive <span class="greek">τοῦ σώματος</span> (<span class="translit">tou sōmatos</span>) is understood as an objective genitive, receiving the action of the head noun.</p></p>
<p id="n5100223"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the removal of the body of flesh.” The genitive <span class="greek">τῆς σαρκός</span> (<span class="translit">tēs sarkos</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive, “fleshly body.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100224"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The second prepositional phrase beginning with <span class="greek">ἐν τῇ περιτομῇ</span> (<span class="translit">en tē peritomē</span>) is parallel to the prepositional phrase <span class="greek">ἐν τῇ ἀπεκδύσει</span> (<span class="translit">en tē apekdusei</span>) and gives a further explanation of it. The words “that is” were supplied to bring out this force in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n5100225"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> The article with the genitive modifier <span class="greek">τῆς πίστεως</span> (<span class="translit">tēs pisteōs</span>) is functioning as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n5100226"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive <span class="greek">τῆς ἐνεργείας</span> (<span class="translit">tēs energeias</span>) has been translated as an objective genitive, “faith <i>in the power</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100227"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> The article <span class="greek">τοῖς</span> (<span class="translit">tois</span>) with <span class="greek">παραπτώμασιν</span> (<span class="translit">paraptōmasin</span>) is functioning as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n5100228"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “nevertheless,” though not in the Greek text, was supplied in the translation to bring out the force of the concessive participle <span class="greek">ὄντας</span> (<span class="translit">ontas</span>). </p></p>
<p id="n5100229"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἐξαλείψας</span> (<span class="translit">exaleipsas</span>) is a temporal adverbial participle of contemporaneous time related to the previous verb <span class="greek">συνεζωοποίησεν</span> (<span class="translit">sunezōopoiēsen</span>), but has been translated as a finite verb because of the complexity of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English to use shorter sentences. For the meaning “destroy” see BDAG 344-45 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐξαλείφω</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n5100230"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the translation of <span class="greek">χειρόγραφον</span> (<span class="translit">cheirographon</span>), see BDAG 1083 s.v. which refers to it as “<i>a certificate of indebtedness</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100231"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 100 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπεκδύομαι</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n5100232"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The antecedent of the Greek pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτῷ</span> (<span class="translit">autō</span>) could either be “Christ” or the “cross.” There are several reasons for choosing “the cross” as the antecedent for <span class="greek">αὐτῷ</span> in verse 15: (1) The nearest antecedent is <span class="greek">τῷ σταυρῷ</span> (<span class="translit">tō staurō</span>) in v. 14; (2) the idea of <span class="greek">ἐδειγμάτισεν ἐν παρρησία</span> (<span class="translit">edeigmatisen en parrēsia</span>, “made a <i>public</i> disgrace”) seems to be more in keeping with the idea of the cross; (3) a reference to Christ seems to miss the irony involved in the idea of triumph—the whole point is that where one would expect defeat, there came <i>the</i> victory; (4) if Christ is the subject of the participles in v. 15 then almost certainly the cross is the referent for <span class="greek">αὐτῷ</span>. Thus the best solution is to see <span class="greek">αὐτῷ</span> as a reference to the cross and the preposition <span class="greek">ἐν</span> (<span class="translit">en</span>) indicating “means” (i.e., <i>by means</i> of the cross) or possibly (though less likely) location (<i>on</i> the cross).</p></p>
<p id="n5100233"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “only,” though not in the Greek text, is supplied in the English translation to bring out the contrast inherent between the two parts of the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n5100234"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but the <i>body</i> of Christ.” The term body here, when used in contrast to shadow (<span class="greek">σκιά</span>, <span class="translit">skia</span>) indicates the opposite meaning, i.e., the reality or substance itself.</p></p>
<p id="n5100235"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive <span class="greek">τοῦ Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou Christou</span>) is appositional and translated as such: “the reality <i>is Christ</i>.” </p></p>
<p id="n5100236"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though the apostle uses the term <span class="greek">ταπεινοφροσύνῃ</span> (<span class="translit">tapeinophrosunē</span>) elsewhere in a positive sense (cf. 3:12), here and in v. 23 the sense is negative and reflects the misguided thinking of Paul’s opponents. </p></p>
<p id="n5100237"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the various views on the translation of <span class="greek">ἐμβατεύων</span> (<span class="translit">embateuōn</span>), see BDAG 321 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐμβατεύω</span> 4. The idea in this context seems to be that the individual in question loves to talk on and on about his spiritual experiences, but in reality they are only coming out of his own sinful flesh. </p></p>
<p id="n5100238"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the mind of his flesh.” In the translation above, <span class="greek">σαρκός</span> (<span class="translit">sarkos</span>) is taken as an attributive genitive. The phrase could also be translated “by his sinful thoughts,” since it appears that Paul is using <span class="greek">σάρξ</span> (<span class="translit">sarx</span>, “flesh”) here in a morally negative way.</p></p>
<p id="n5100239"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek participle <span class="greek">κρατῶν</span> (<span class="translit">kratōn</span>) was translated as a finite verb to avoid an unusually long and pedantic sentence structure in English. </p></p>
<p id="n5100240"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100240">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 387 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιχορηγέω</span> 3.</p></p>
<p id="n5100241"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou theou</span>) has been translated as a genitive of source, “from God.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100242"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the phrase “elemental spirits” in 2:8.</p></p>
<p id="n5100243"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression “founded as they are” brings out the force of the Greek preposition <span class="greek">κατά</span> (<span class="translit">kata</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n5100244"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100244">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The commands and teachings of men.” </p></p>
<p id="n5100245"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having a word of wisdom.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100246"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100246">46</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The vast bulk of witnesses, including some very significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D F G H <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 0278 33 1175 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy), have <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) here, but the shorter reading is supported by some early and significant witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B 1739 b m Hil Ambst Spec). The <span class="greek">καί</span> looks to be a motivated reading in that it makes <span class="greek">ἀφειδία</span> (<span class="translit">apheidia</span>) “the third in a series of datives after <span class="greek">ἐν</span>, rather than an instrumental dative qualifying the previous prepositional phrase” (<i>TCGNT</i> 556). At the same time, the omission of <span class="greek">καί</span> could possibly have been unintentional. A decision is difficult, but the shorter reading is slightly preferred. NA<sup>28</sup> puts <span class="greek">καί</span> in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n5100247"><a href="file1160.xhtml#n5100247">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation understands this verse to contain a concessive subordinate clause within the main clause. The Greek particle <span class="greek">μέν</span> (<span class="translit">men</span>) is the second word of the embedded subordinate clause. The phrase <span class="greek">οὐκ ἐν τιμῇ τινι</span> (<span class="translit">ouk en timē tini</span>) modifies the subordinate clause, and the main clause resumes with the preposition <span class="greek">πρός</span> (<span class="translit">pros</span>). The translation has placed the subordinate clause first in order for clarity instead of retaining its embedded location. For a detailed discussion of this grammatical construction, see B. Hollenbach, “Col 2:23: Which Things Lead to the Fulfillment of the Flesh,” <i>NTS</i> 25 (1979): 254-61.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
