<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Timothy 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Timothy<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Those who are under the yoke as slaves<sup><a id="n540061" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n540061">1</a></sup> must regard their own masters as deserving of full respect. This will prevent<sup><a id="n540062" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n540062">2</a></sup> the name of God and Christian teaching<sup><a id="n540063" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n540063">3</a></sup> from being discredited.<sup><a id="n540064" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n540064">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:2</span> But those who have believing masters must not show them less respect<sup><a id="n540065" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n540065">5</a></sup> because they are brothers. Instead they are to serve all the more, because those who benefit from their service are believers and dearly loved.<sup><a id="n540066" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n540066">6</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Summary of Timothy’s Duties</p><p class="bodytext">Teach them and exhort them about these things.<sup><a id="n540067" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n540067">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:3</span> If someone spreads false teachings<sup><a id="n540068" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n540068">8</a></sup> and does not agree with sound words (that is, those of our Lord Jesus Christ) and with the teaching that accords with godliness, <span class="verse">6:4</span> he is conceited and understands nothing, but has an unhealthy interest in controversies and verbal disputes. This gives rise to envy, dissension, slanders, evil suspicions, <span class="verse">6:5</span> and constant bickering by people corrupted in their minds and deprived of the truth, who suppose that godliness<sup><a id="n540069" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n540069">9</a></sup> is a way of making a profit. <span class="verse">6:6</span> Now godliness combined with contentment brings great profit. <span class="verse">6:7</span> For we have brought nothing into this world and so<sup><a id="n5400610" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400610">10</a></sup> we cannot take a single thing out either. <span class="verse">6:8</span> But if we have food and shelter, we will be satisfied with that.<sup><a id="n5400611" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400611">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:9</span> Those who long to be rich, however, stumble into temptation and a trap and many senseless and harmful desires that plunge people into ruin and destruction. <span class="verse">6:10</span> For the love of money is the root<sup><a id="n5400612" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400612">12</a></sup> of all evils.<sup><a id="n5400613" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400613">13</a></sup> Some people in reaching for it have strayed from the faith and stabbed themselves with many pains. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:11</span> But you, as a person dedicated to God,<sup><a id="n5400614" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400614">14</a></sup> keep away from all that.<sup><a id="n5400615" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400615">15</a></sup> Instead pursue righteousness, godliness, faithfulness, love, endurance, and gentleness. <span class="verse">6:12</span> Compete well<sup><a id="n5400616" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400616">16</a></sup> for the faith and lay hold of that eternal life you were called for and made your good confession<sup><a id="n5400617" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400617">17</a></sup> for<sup><a id="n5400618" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400618">18</a></sup> in the presence of many witnesses. <span class="verse">6:13</span> I charge you<sup><a id="n5400619" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400619">19</a></sup> before God who gives life to all things and Christ Jesus who made his good confession<sup><a id="n5400620" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400620">20</a></sup> before Pontius Pilate, <span class="verse">6:14</span> to obey<sup><a id="n5400621" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400621">21</a></sup> this command<sup><a id="n5400622" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400622">22</a></sup> without fault or failure until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ <span class="verse">6:15</span> —whose appearing<sup><a id="n5400623" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400623">23</a></sup> the blessed and only Sovereign, the King of kings and Lord of lords, will reveal at the right time. <span class="verse">6:16</span> He alone possesses immortality and lives in unapproachable light, whom no human has ever seen or is able to see. To him be honor and eternal power! Amen. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:17</span> Command those who are rich in this world’s goods<sup><a id="n5400624" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400624">24</a></sup> not to be haughty or to set their hope on riches, which are uncertain,<sup><a id="n5400625" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400625">25</a></sup> but on God who richly provides us with all things for our enjoyment. <span class="verse">6:18</span> Tell them to do good,<sup><a id="n5400626" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400626">26</a></sup> to be rich in good deeds, to be generous givers, sharing with others.<sup><a id="n5400627" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400627">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:19</span> In this way they will save up<sup><a id="n5400628" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400628">28</a></sup> a treasure for themselves as a firm foundation<sup><a id="n5400629" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400629">29</a></sup> for the future and so lay hold of<sup><a id="n5400630" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400630">30</a></sup> what is truly life. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Conclusion</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:20</span> O Timothy, protect what has been entrusted to you. Avoid<sup><a id="n5400631" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400631">31</a></sup> the profane chatter and absurdities<sup><a id="n5400632" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400632">32</a></sup> of so-called “knowledge.”<sup><a id="n5400633" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400633">33</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:21</span> By professing it, some have strayed from the faith.<sup><a id="n5400634" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400634">34</a></sup> Grace be with you all.<sup><a id="n5400635" href="file1179_notes.xhtml#n5400635">35</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>