<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 James 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>James<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Passions and Pride</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Where do the conflicts and where<sup><a id="n590041" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n590041">1</a></sup> do the quarrels among you come from? Is it not from this,<sup><a id="n590042" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n590042">2</a></sup> from your passions that battle inside you?<sup><a id="n590043" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n590043">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:2</span> You desire and you do not have; you murder and envy and you cannot obtain; you quarrel and fight. You do not have because you do not ask; <span class="verse">4:3</span> you ask and do not receive because you ask wrongly, so you can spend it on your passions. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:4</span> Adulterers, do you not know that friendship with the world means hostility toward God?<sup><a id="n590044" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n590044">4</a></sup> So whoever decides to be the world’s friend makes himself God’s enemy. <span class="verse">4:5</span> Or do you think the scripture means nothing when it says,<sup><a id="n590045" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n590045">5</a></sup> “The spirit that God<sup><a id="n590046" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n590046">6</a></sup> caused<sup><a id="n590047" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n590047">7</a></sup> to live within us has an envious yearning”?<sup><a id="n590048" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n590048">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:6</span> But he gives greater grace. Therefore it says, “<i><b>God opposes the proud, but he gives grace to the humble</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n590049" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n590049">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:7</span> So submit to God. But resist the devil and he will flee from you. <span class="verse">4:8</span> Draw near to God and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and make your hearts pure, you double-minded.<sup><a id="n5900410" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900410">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:9</span> Grieve, mourn,<sup><a id="n5900411" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900411">11</a></sup> and weep. Turn your laughter<sup><a id="n5900412" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900412">12</a></sup> into mourning and your joy into despair. <span class="verse">4:10</span> Humble yourselves before the Lord and he will exalt you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:11</span> Do not speak against one another, brothers and sisters.<sup><a id="n5900413" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900413">13</a></sup> He who speaks against a fellow believer<sup><a id="n5900414" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900414">14</a></sup> or judges a fellow believer speaks against the law and judges the law. But if you judge the law, you are not a doer of the law but its judge.<sup><a id="n5900415" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900415">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:12</span> But there is only one who is lawgiver and judge—the one who is able to save and destroy. On the other hand, who are you to judge your neighbor?<sup><a id="n5900416" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900416">16</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:13</span> Come now, you who say, “Today or tomorrow we will go into this or that town<sup><a id="n5900417" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900417">17</a></sup> and spend a year there and do business and make a profit.” <span class="verse">4:14</span> You<sup><a id="n5900418" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900418">18</a></sup> do not know about tomorrow. What is your life like?<sup><a id="n5900419" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900419">19</a></sup> For you are a puff of smoke<sup><a id="n5900420" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900420">20</a></sup> that appears for a short time and then vanishes. <span class="verse">4:15</span> You ought to say instead,<sup><a id="n5900421" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900421">21</a></sup> “If the Lord is willing, then we will live and do this or that.” <span class="verse">4:16</span> But as it is,<sup><a id="n5900422" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900422">22</a></sup> you boast about your arrogant plans.<sup><a id="n5900423" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900423">23</a></sup> All such boasting is evil. <span class="verse">4:17</span> So whoever knows what is good to do<sup><a id="n5900424" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900424">24</a></sup> and does not do it is guilty of sin.<sup><a id="n5900425" href="file1209_notes.xhtml#n5900425">25</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>