<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Hebrews 2</h2>
<p id="n580021"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n580021">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The message spoken through angels</i> refers to the OT law, which according to Jewish tradition was mediated to Moses through angels (cf. Deut 33:2; Ps 68:17-18; Acts 7:38, 53; Gal 3:19; and <i>Jub</i>. 1:27, 29; Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 15.5.3 [15.136]).</p></p>
<p id="n580022"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n580022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “through angels became valid and every violation.”</p></p>
<p id="n580023"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n580023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God bearing witness together” (the phrase “with them” is implied).</p></p>
<p id="n580024"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n580024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and distributions of the Holy Spirit.”</p></p>
<p id="n580025"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n580025">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>the world to come</i> means “the coming inhabited earth,” using the Greek term which describes the world of people and their civilizations.</p></p>
<p id="n580026"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n580026">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the previous reference to <i>the world</i> in Heb 1:6.</p></p>
<p id="n580027"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n580027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “remember him.”</p></p>
<p id="n580028"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n580028">8</a> <p><b>tc</b> Several witnesses, many of them early and significant (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D* P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0243 0278 33 1739 1881 <i>al</i> lat co), have at the end of v 7, “You have given him dominion over the works of your hands.” Other <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, not quite as impressive in weight, lack the words (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B D<sup>2</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>). In spite of the impressive external evidence for the longer reading, it is most likely a scribal addition to conform the text of Hebrews to Ps 8:6 (8:7 LXX). Conformity of a NT quotation of the OT to the LXX was a routine scribal activity, and can hardly be in doubt here as to the cause of the longer reading.</p></p>
<p id="n580029"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n580029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you subjected all things under his feet.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 8:4-6.</p></p>
<p id="n5800210"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800210">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>all things under his control</i> occurs three times in 2:8. The latter two occurrences are not exactly identical to the Greek text of Ps 8:6 quoted at the beginning of the verse, but have been adapted by the writer of Hebrews to fit his argument.</p></p>
<p id="n5800211"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who was made a little lower than the angels.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800212"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because of the suffering of death.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800213"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “would taste.” Here the Greek verb does not mean “sample a small amount” (as a typical English reader might infer from the word “taste”), but “experience something cognitively or emotionally; come to know something” (cf. BDAG 195 s.v. <span class="greek">γεύομαι</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n5800214"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for whom are all things and through whom are all things.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800215"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800215">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek word translated <i>pioneer</i> is used of a “prince” or leader, the representative head of a family. It also carries nuances of “trailblazer,” one who breaks through to new ground for those who follow him. It is used some thirty-five times in the Greek OT and four times in the NT, always of Christ (Acts 3:15; 5:31; Heb 2:10; 12:2).</p></p>
<p id="n5800216"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “are all from one.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800217"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for which reason.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800218"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” as here (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited). The context here also indicates both men and women are in view; note especially the collective <span class="greek">τὰ παιδία</span> (<span class="translit">ta paidia</span>) in v. 14.</p></p>
<p id="n5800219"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here, because of its occurrence in an OT quotation, <span class="greek">τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς</span> (<span class="translit">tois adelphois</span>) has been translated simply as “brothers” rather than “brothers and sisters” (see the note on the latter phrase in the previous verse).</p></p>
<p id="n5800220"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800220">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 22:22.</p></p>
<p id="n5800221"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and again,” as a continuation of the preceding.</p></p>
<p id="n5800222"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold, I,” but this construction often means “here is/there is” (cf. BDAG 468 s.v. <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n5800223"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800224"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800224">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 8:17-18.</p></p>
<p id="n5800225"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “partook of” (this is a different word than the one in v. 14a).</p></p>
<p id="n5800226"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the same.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800227"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “break the power of,” “reduce to nothing.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800228"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “he was obligated.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800229"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n5800230"><a href="file1193.xhtml#n5800230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “propitiation.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
