<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n400281"><a href="file997.xhtml#n400281">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the angel of the Lord.” See the note on the word “Lord” in 1:20. </p></p>
<p id="n400282"><a href="file997.xhtml#n400282">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400283"><a href="file997.xhtml#n400283">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400284"><a href="file997.xhtml#n400284">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But answering, the angel said.” This is somewhat redundant in English and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n400285"><a href="file997.xhtml#n400285">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for I know.”</p></p>
<p id="n400286"><a href="file997.xhtml#n400286">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>crucified</i> in 20:19.</p></p>
<p id="n400287"><a href="file997.xhtml#n400287">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb here is passive (<span class="greek">ἠγέρθη</span>, <span class="translit">ēgerthē</span>). This “divine passive” (see <i>ExSyn</i> 437-38) points to the fact that Jesus was raised by God.</p></p>
<p id="n400288"><a href="file997.xhtml#n400288">8</a> <p><b>tc</b> Expansions on the text, especially when the Lord is the subject, are a common scribal activity. In this instance, since the subject is embedded in the verb, three major variants have emerged to make the subject explicit: <span class="greek">ὁ κύριος</span> (<span class="translit">ho kurios</span>, “the Lord”; A C D L W <span class="greek">Γ</span> 0148 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 565 579 700 1241 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), <span class="greek">τὸ σῶμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">to sōma tou kuriou</span>, “the body of the Lord”; 1424), and <span class="greek">ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (<span class="translit">ho Iēsous</span>, “Jesus”; <span class="greek">Φ</span>). The reading with no explicit subject, however, is superior on both internal and external grounds, being supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B <span class="greek">Θ</span> 33 892* co. </p></p>
<p id="n400289"><a href="file997.xhtml#n400289">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold he.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4002810"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002810">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the angel’s instructions to tell the disciples.</p></p>
<p id="n4002811"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002811">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate that the return of the women from the tomb was interrupted by this appearance of Jesus. The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4002812"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002812">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002813"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002813">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002814"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002814">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold, some of the guard.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4002815"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002816"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002816">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002817"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002817">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002818"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002818">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἐπί</span> (<span class="translit">epi</span>) followed by the genitive = “before,” especially in the language of lawsuits (BDAG 363 s.v. 3).</p></p>
<p id="n4002819"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002819">19</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ <span class="greek">αὐτόν</span> (<span class="translit">auton</span>, “him”) is found after <span class="greek">πείσομεν</span> (<span class="translit">peisomen</span>, “we will satisfy”) in the majority of witnesses, though it seems to be motivated by a need for clarification and cannot therefore easily explain the rise of the shorter reading (which is found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B <span class="greek">Θ</span> 33 <i>pc</i>). Nevertheless, English style requires the pronoun. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4002820"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002820">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and make you free from care” = “we will keep you out of trouble.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002821"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002821">21</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The word <span class="greek">ἡμέρας</span> (<span class="translit">hēmeras</span>, “day”) is found after <span class="greek">σήμερον</span> (<span class="translit">sēmeron</span>, “today, this [day]”) in some early and significant witnesses (B D L <span class="greek">Θ</span> lat, as well as other versions and fathers), but may be added for emphasis (cf. Acts 20:26; 27:33; Rom 11:8; 2 Cor 3:14). But since the idiom with “day” is unquestionably found only in Paul’s speeches in Acts or his letters, intrinsic evidence is against the addition. The shorter reading (found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A W 0148<sup>vid</sup> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) is thus preferred. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating reservations about its authenticity. Whether authentic or not, the translation is not affected.</p></p>
<p id="n4002822"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002822">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Jesus’ instructions in v. 10.</p></p>
<p id="n4002823"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002823">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002824"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002824">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “him” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4002825"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002825">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek text reads here <span class="greek">οἱ δὲ ἐδίστασαν</span> (<span class="translit">hoi de edistasan</span>). Some scholars argue that the article is functioning like a personal pronoun, thus “<i>they</i> doubted” (e.g., D. A. Hagner, <i>Matthew</i> [WBC], 2:884). If so, then all the disciples would be in view. The translation of the text takes <span class="greek">οἱ</span> as an alternative pronoun which has a partitive notion (i.e., some of the disciples doubted, but not all). The difficulty with the personal pronoun view is that there are no examples of it in Matthew in which the same subject immediately precedes with its own verb (as would be the case in “they worshiped…they doubted”). Such, in fact, would be quite awkward, for the article would be unnecessary since the pronominal referent is already embedded in the verb. The only reason for the article here would be to distinguish the subject in some way; but if the same subject is in view, no distinction is being made.</p></p>
<p id="n4002826"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002826">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “coming, Jesus spoke to them, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>, “saying”) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4002827"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002827">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Go…baptize…teach” are participles modifying the imperative verb “make disciples.” According to <i>ExSyn</i> 645 the first participle (<span class="greek">πορευθέντες</span>,<span class="translit"> poreuthentes</span>, “Go”) fits the typical structural pattern for the attendant circumstance participle (aorist participle preceding aorist main verb, with the mood of the main verb usually imperative or indicative) and thus picks up the mood (imperative in this case) from the main verb (<span class="greek">μαθητεύσατε</span>, <span class="translit">mathēteusate</span>, “make disciples”). This means that semantically the action of “going” is commanded, just as “making disciples” is. As for the two participles that follow the main verb (<span class="greek">βαπτίζοντες</span>, <span class="translit">baptizontes</span>, “baptizing”; and <span class="greek">διδάσκοντες</span>, <span class="translit">didaskontes</span>, “teaching”), these do not fit the normal pattern for attendant circumstance participles, since they are present participles and follow the aorist main verb. However, some interpreters do see them as carrying additional imperative force in context. Others regard them as means, manner, or even result.</p></p>
<p id="n4002828"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002828">28</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although some scholars have denied that the trinitarian baptismal formula in the Great Commission was a part of the autographic text of Matthew, there is no ms support for their contention. F. C. Conybeare, “The Eusebian Form of the Text of Mt. 28:19, ” <i>ZNW</i> 2 (1901): 275-88, based his view on a faulty reading of Eusebius’ quotations of this text. The shorter reading has also been accepted, on other grounds, by a few other scholars. For discussion (and refutation of the conjecture that removes this baptismal formula), see B. J. Hubbard, <i>The Matthean Redaction of a Primitive Apostolic Commissioning</i> (SBLDS 19), 163-64, 167-75; and Jane Schaberg, <i>The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit</i> (SBLDS 61), 27-29.</p></p>
<p id="n4002829"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002829">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has been translated here as “remember” (BDAG 468 s.v. 1.c).</p></p>
<p id="n4002830"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002830">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I am with you</i>. Matthew’s Gospel begins with the prophecy that the Savior’s name would be “Emmanuel, that is, ‘God <i>with</i> us,’” (1:23, in which the author has linked Isa 7:14 and 8:8, 10 together) and it ends with Jesus’ promise to be <i>with</i> his disciples forever. The Gospel of Matthew thus forms an inclusio about Jesus in his relationship to his people that suggests his deity.</p></p>
<p id="n4002831"><a href="file997.xhtml#n4002831">31</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A<sup>c</sup> <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it sy) have <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”) at the end of v. 20. Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Further, no good reason exists for the omission of the particle in significant and early witnesses such as <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A* B D W ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 <i>al</i> lat sa.</p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
