<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Hebrews 7</h2>
<p id="n580071"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n580071">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> A series of quotations from Gen 14:17-19.</p></p>
<p id="n580072"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n580072">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to whom,” continuing the description of Melchizedek. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n580073"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n580073">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a tenth part.”</p></p>
<p id="n580074"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n580074">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 14:20.</p></p>
<p id="n580075"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n580075">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “first being interpreted,” describing Melchizedek.</p></p>
<p id="n580076"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n580076">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> These words are repeated from the quotation of Gen 14:18 in the previous verse.</p></p>
<p id="n580077"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n580077">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to whom.”</p></p>
<p id="n580078"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n580078">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a tenth part.”</p></p>
<p id="n580079"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n580079">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the priesthood.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800710"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800710">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from their brothers.” See BDAG 18-19 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 2.b.</p></p>
<p id="n5800711"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800711">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have come from the loins of Abraham.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800712"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800712">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one”; in the translation the referent (Melchizedek) has been specified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5800713"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800713">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is not descended from them.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800714"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800714">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a tenth part.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800715"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800715">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> The verbs “<i>collected…and blessed</i>” emphasize the continuing effect of the past actions, i.e., Melchizedek’s importance.</p></p>
<p id="n5800716"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800716">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the loins of his father” (a reference to Abraham). The name “Abraham” has been repeated in the translation at this point (cf. v. 9) in order to clarify the referent (i.e., what ancestor was in view).</p><p><b>sn</b> The point of the phrase <i>still in his ancestor’s loins</i> is that Levi was as yet unborn, still in his ancestor Abraham’s body. Thus Levi participated in Abraham’s action when Abraham paid tithes to Melchizedek.</p></p>
<p id="n5800717"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800717">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “based on it.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800718"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800718">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of necessity a change in the law comes to pass.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800719"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800719">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “shares in.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800720"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from which no one.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800721"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800721">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a law of a fleshly command.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800722"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800722">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for he/it is witnessed that.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800723"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800723">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 110:4 (see Heb 5:6 and 6:20).</p></p>
<p id="n5800724"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800724">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the setting aside of a former command comes to pass.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800725"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800725">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because of its weakness and uselessness.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800726"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800726">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek text contains an elaborate comparison between v. 20a and v. 22, with a parenthesis (vv. 20b-21) in between; the comparison is literally, “by as much as…by so much” or “to the degree that…to that same degree.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800727"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800727">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5800728"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800728">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “did so” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n5800729"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800729">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 110:4 (see Heb 5:6; 6:20, and 7:17).</p></p>
<p id="n5800730"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800730">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “surety.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800731"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800731">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they on the one hand” in contrast with “he on the other hand” in v. 24.</p></p>
<p id="n5800732"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800732">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they were prevented by death.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800733"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800733">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from continuing” (the words “in office” are supplied for clarity).</p></p>
<p id="n5800734"><a href="file1198.xhtml#n5800734">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Heb 5:2 where this concept was introduced.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
