<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Colossians 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Colossians<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Households</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:18</span> Wives, submit to your<sup><a id="n5100320" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100320">20</a></sup> husbands, as is fitting in the Lord. <span class="verse">3:19</span> Husbands, love your wives and do not be embittered against them. <span class="verse">3:20</span> Children, obey your parents in everything, for this is pleasing in the Lord. <span class="verse">3:21</span> Fathers,<sup><a id="n5100321" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100321">21</a></sup> do not provoke<sup><a id="n5100322" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100322">22</a></sup> your children, so they will not become disheartened. <span class="verse">3:22</span> Slaves,<sup><a id="n5100323" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100323">23</a></sup> obey your earthly<sup><a id="n5100324" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100324">24</a></sup> masters in every respect, not only when they are watching—like those who are strictly people-pleasers—but with a sincere heart, fearing the Lord. <span class="verse">3:23</span> Whatever you are doing,<sup><a id="n5100325" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100325">25</a></sup> work at it with enthusiasm,<sup><a id="n5100326" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100326">26</a></sup> as to the Lord and not for people,<sup><a id="n5100327" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100327">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:24</span> because you know that you will receive your<sup><a id="n5100328" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100328">28</a></sup> inheritance<sup><a id="n5100329" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100329">29</a></sup> from the Lord as the reward. Serve<sup><a id="n5100330" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100330">30</a></sup> the Lord Christ. <span class="verse">3:25</span> For the one who does wrong will be repaid for his wrong,<sup><a id="n5100331" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100331">31</a></sup> and there are no exceptions.<sup><a id="n5100332" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100332">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:1</span> Masters, treat your slaves with justice and fairness, because you know that you also have a master in heaven.</p>
<p class="bodytext"></p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Pray for the Success of Paul’s Mission</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:2</span> Be devoted to prayer, keeping alert in it with thanksgiving. <span class="verse">4:3</span> At the same time pray<sup><a id="n510041" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n510041">1</a></sup> for us too, that<sup><a id="n510042" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n510042">2</a></sup> God may open a door for the message<sup><a id="n510043" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n510043">3</a></sup> so that we may proclaim<sup><a id="n510044" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n510044">4</a></sup> the mystery of Christ, for which I am in chains.<sup><a id="n510045" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n510045">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:4</span> Pray that I may make it known as I should.<sup><a id="n510046" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n510046">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:5</span> Conduct yourselves<sup><a id="n510047" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n510047">7</a></sup> with wisdom toward outsiders, making the most of the opportunities. <span class="verse">4:6</span> Let your speech always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how you should answer everyone. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Personal Greetings and Instructions</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:7</span> Tychicus, a dear brother, faithful minister, and fellow slave<sup><a id="n510048" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n510048">8</a></sup> in the Lord, will tell you all the news about me.<sup><a id="n510049" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n510049">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:8</span> I sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are doing<sup><a id="n5100410" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100410">10</a></sup> and that he may encourage your hearts. <span class="verse">4:9</span> I sent him<sup><a id="n5100411" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100411">11</a></sup> with Onesimus, the faithful and dear brother, who is one of you.<sup><a id="n5100412" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100412">12</a></sup> They will tell<sup><a id="n5100413" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100413">13</a></sup> you about everything here. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:10</span> Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, sends you greetings, as does Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (about whom you received instructions; if he comes to you, welcome him). <span class="verse">4:11</span> And Jesus who is called Justus also sends greetings. In terms of Jewish converts,<sup><a id="n5100414" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100414">14</a></sup> these are the only fellow workers for the kingdom of God, and they have been a comfort to me. <span class="verse">4:12</span> Epaphras, who is one of you and a slave<sup><a id="n5100415" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100415">15</a></sup> of Christ,<sup><a id="n5100416" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100416">16</a></sup> greets you. He is always struggling in prayer on your behalf, so that you may stand mature and fully assured<sup><a id="n5100417" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100417">17</a></sup> in all the will of God. <span class="verse">4:13</span> For I can testify that he has worked hard<sup><a id="n5100418" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100418">18</a></sup> for you and for those in Laodicea and Hierapolis. <span class="verse">4:14</span> Our dear friend Luke the physician and Demas<sup><a id="n5100419" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100419">19</a></sup> greet you. <span class="verse">4:15</span> Give my greetings to the brothers and sisters<sup><a id="n5100420" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100420">20</a></sup> who are in Laodicea and to Nympha and the church that meets in her<sup><a id="n5100421" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100421">21</a></sup> house.<sup><a id="n5100422" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100422">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:16</span> And after<sup><a id="n5100423" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100423">23</a></sup> you have read this letter, have it read<sup><a id="n5100424" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100424">24</a></sup> to the church of Laodicea. In turn, read the letter from Laodicea<sup><a id="n5100425" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100425">25</a></sup> as well. <span class="verse">4:17</span> And tell Archippus, “See to it that you complete the ministry you received in the Lord.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:18</span> I, Paul, write this greeting by my own hand.<sup><a id="n5100426" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100426">26</a></sup> Remember my chains.<sup><a id="n5100427" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100427">27</a></sup> Grace be with you.<sup><a id="n5100428" href="file1162_notes.xhtml#n5100428">28</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>