<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 16</h2>
<p id="n460161"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n460161">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as I directed the churches of Galatia, so also you yourselves do.”</p></p>
<p id="n460162"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n460162">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “set aside, storing whatever he has been blessed with.”</p></p>
<p id="n460163"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n460163">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “set aside, storing.” The participle <span class="greek">θησαυρίζων</span> (<span class="translit">thēsaurizōn</span>) indicates the purpose or result of setting aside the extra income.</p></p>
<p id="n460164"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n460164">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> “To the extent that God has blessed you” translates an awkward expression, “whatever has been prospered [to you].” This verb has been translated as an active with “God” as subject, taking it as a divine passive.</p></p>
<p id="n460165"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n460165">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that collections will not be taking place.”</p></p>
<p id="n460168"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n460168">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for a door has opened wide to me, great and effective.”</p></p>
<p id="n460169"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n460169">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Since Paul appears to expect specific delegates here and they were most likely men, the Greek word <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> (<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>) here has not been translated as “brothers and sisters.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601610"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with the brothers.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601611"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it was simply not the will that he come now.” </p></p>
<p id="n4601612"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4601613"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “firstfruits.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601614"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “they have made up for your absence” (BDAG 70 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναπληρόω</span> 3).</p></p>
<p id="n4601615"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the churches of Asia”; in the NT “Asia” always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n4601616"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601616">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>Aquila and Prisca</i> see also Acts 18:2, 18, 26; Rom 16:3-4; 2 Tim 4:19. In the NT “Priscilla” and “Prisca” are the same person. Paul uses the name <i>Prisca,</i> while the author of Acts uses the diminutive form of the name Priscilla.</p></p>
<p id="n4601617"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601617">17</a> <p><b>tc</b> The plural form of this verb, <span class="greek">ἀσπάζονται</span> (<span class="translit">aspazontai</span>, “[they] greet”), is found in several good <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B F G 075 0121 0243 33 1739 1881) as well as the Byzantine cursives. But the singular is read by an equally impressive group (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C D K P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 104 2464). This part of the verse is lacking in codex A. Deciding on the basis of external evidence is quite difficult. Internally, however, the singular appears to have given rise to the plural: (1) The rest of the greetings in this verse are in the plural; this one was probably made plural by some scribes for purposes of assimilation; and, more significantly, (2) since both Aquila and Prisca are mentioned as the ones who send the greeting, the plural is more natural. The singular is, of course, not impossible Greek; indeed, a singular verb with a compound subject is used with some frequency in the NT (cf. Matt 13:55; Mark 8:27; 14:1; John 2:2; 3:22; 4:36, 53; Acts 5:29; 16:31; 1 Tim 6:4). This is especially common when “Jesus and his disciples” is the subject. What is significant is that when such a construction is found the emphasis is placed on the first-named person (in this case, Aquila). Normally when these two are mentioned in the NT, Priscilla is mentioned first (Acts 18:18, 26; Rom 16:3; 2 Tim 4:19). Only here and in Acts 18:2 (the first mention of them) is Aquila mentioned before Priscilla. Many suggest that Priscilla is listed first due to prominence. Though that is possible, both the mention of Aquila first here and the singular verb give him special prominence (cf. <i>ExSyn</i> 401-2). What such prominence means in each instance is difficult to assess. Nevertheless, here is a Pauline instance in which Aquila is given prominence. Too much can be made of the word order argument in either direction.</p></p>
<p id="n4601618"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4601619"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek text has <span class="greek">μαράνα θά</span> (<span class="translit">marana tha</span>). These Aramaic words can also be read as <span class="translit">maran atha</span>, translated “Our Lord has come!”</p></p>
<p id="n4601620"><a href="file1124.xhtml#n4601620">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D<span class="greek"> Ψ</span> 075 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat bo) conclude this letter with <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”), such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Although far fewer witnesses lack the valedictory particle (B F 0121 0243 33 81 630 1739* 1881 sa), their collective testimony is difficult to explain if the omission is not authentic. </p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
