<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 23</h2>
<p id="n440231"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n440231">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul, looking directly at the council, said.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀτενίσας</span> (<span class="translit">atenisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n440232"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n440232">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Sanhedrin” (the Sanhedrin was the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n440233"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n440233">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 846 s.v. <span class="greek">πολιτεύομαι</span> 3 has “W. a double dat. <span class="greek">συνειδήσει ἀγαθῇ πεπολίτευμαι τῷ θεῷ</span> <i>I have lived my life with a clear conscience before God</i> Ac 23:1.”</p></p>
<p id="n440234"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n440234">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and” (<span class="greek">δέ</span>, <span class="translit">de</span>); the phrase “at that” has been used in the translation to clarify the cause and effect relationship.</p></p>
<p id="n440235"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n440235">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 778 s.v. <span class="greek">παρίστημι</span>/<span class="greek">παριστάνω</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">α</span> has “<span class="greek">οἱ παρεστῶτες αὐτῷ</span> <i>those standing near him</i> Ac 23:2.”</p></p>
<p id="n440236"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n440236">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n440237"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n440237">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “hit” (“strike” maintains the wordplay with the following verse). The action was probably designed to indicate a rejection of Paul’s claim to a clear conscience in the previous verse.</p></p>
<p id="n440238"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n440238">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>You whitewashed wall</i>. This was an idiom for hypocrisy—just as the wall was painted on the outside but something different on the inside, so this person was not what he appeared or pretended to be (L&amp;N 88.234; see also BDAG 1010 s.v. <span class="greek">τοῖχος</span>). Paul was claiming that the man’s response was two-faced (Ezek 13:10-16; Matt 23:27-28). See also Deut 28:22.</p></p>
<p id="n440239"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n440239">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And do.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4402310"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>The law</i> refers to the law of Moses.</p></p>
<p id="n4402311"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 769 s.v. <span class="greek">παρανομέω</span> has “<span class="greek">παρανομῶν κελεύεις</span> <i>in violation of the law you order</i> Ac 23:3.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>In violation of the law</i>. Paul was claiming that punishment was given before the examination was complete (<i>m. Sanhedrin</i> 3:6-8). Luke’s noting of this detail shows how quickly the leadership moved to react against Paul.</p></p>
<p id="n4402312"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “him” is not in the Greek text but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4402313"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 33.393 has for <span class="greek">λοιδορέω</span> (<span class="translit">loidoreō</span>) “to speak in a highly insulting manner—‘to slander, to insult strongly, slander, insult.’”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Insult God’s high priest</i>. Paul was close to violation of the Mosaic law with his response, as the citation from Exod 22:28 in v. 5 makes clear.</p></p>
<p id="n4402314"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402315"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “know.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402316"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402316">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 22:28. This text defines a form of blasphemy. Paul, aware of the fact that he came close to crossing the line, backed off out of respect for the law.</p></p>
<p id="n4402317"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 200 s.v. <span class="greek">γινώσκω</span> 4 has “to be aware of someth., <i>perceive, notice, realize</i>”; this is further clarified by section 4.c: “w. <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> foll….Ac 23:6.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402318"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402318">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Sadducees</i> in 4:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402319"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402319">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisee</i> in 5:34.</p></p>
<p id="n4402320"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Sanhedrin” (the Sanhedrin was the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n4402321"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, concerning the hope that the dead will be resurrected. <i>Grk</i> “concerning the hope and resurrection.” BDAG 320 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐλπίς</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span> states, “Of Israel’s messianic hope Ac 23:6 (<span class="greek">ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> καὶ ἀνάστασις</span> for <span class="greek">ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> τῆς ἀν</span>. [obj. gen] as 2 Macc 3:29 <span class="greek">ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> καὶ σωτηρία</span>).” With an objective genitive construction, the resurrection of the dead would be the “object” of the hope.</p></p>
<p id="n4402322"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">εἰπόντος</span> (<span class="translit">eipontos</span>) has been translated temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402323"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a dispute” (BDAG 940 s.v. <span class="greek">στάσις</span> 3).</p></p>
<p id="n4402324"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “there came about an argument.” This has been simplified to “an argument began”</p></p>
<p id="n4402325"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 55 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀμφότεροι</span> 2 has “<i>all</i>, even when more than two are involved…<span class="greek">Φαρισαῖοι ὁμολογοῦσιν τὰ ἀ</span>. <i>believe in them all</i> 23:8.” On this belief see Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 2.8.14 (2.163); <i>Ant</i>. 18.1.3 (18.14).</p><p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4402326"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “clamor” (cf. BDAG 565 s.v. <span class="greek">κραυγή</span> 1.a, which has “<i>there arose a loud outcry</i>” here, and Exod 12:30).</p></p>
<p id="n4402327"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and some scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 4:5.</p></p>
<p id="n4402328"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402328">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “standing up.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναστάντες</span> (<span class="translit">anastantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402329"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “protested strongly, saying.” L&amp;N 39.27 has “<span class="greek">διαμάχομαι</span>: to fight or contend with, involving severity and thoroughness—‘to protest strongly, to contend with.’…‘some scribes from the party of the Pharisees protested strongly’ Ac 23:9.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402330"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402330">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>“We find nothing wrong with this man.”</i> Here is another declaration of innocence. These leaders recognized the possibility that Paul might have the right to make his claim.</p></p>
<p id="n4402331"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402331">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> This genitive absolute construction with the participle <span class="greek">γινομένης</span> (<span class="translit">ginomenēs</span>) has been taken temporally (it could also be translated as causal).</p></p>
<p id="n4402332"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402332">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). In Greek the term <span class="greek">χιλίαρχος</span> (<span class="translit">chiliarchos</span>) literally described the “commander of a thousand,” but it was used as the standard translation for the Latin <i>tribunus militum</i> or <i>tribunus militare</i>, the military tribune who commanded a cohort of 600 men.</p></p>
<p id="n4402333"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402333">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that Paul would be torn to pieces by them.” BDAG 236 s.v. <span class="greek">διασπάω</span> has “of an angry mob <span class="greek">μὴ διασπασθῇ ὁ Παῦλος ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν</span> <i>that Paul would be torn in pieces by them</i> Ac 23:10.” The passive construction is somewhat awkward in English and has been converted to an equivalent active construction in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402334"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402334">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Normally this term means “army,” but according to BDAG 947 s.v. <span class="greek">στράτευμα</span>, “Of a smaller detachment of soldiers, sing. Ac 23:10, 27.” In the plural it can be translated “troops,” but it is singular here.</p></p>
<p id="n4402335"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402335">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to go down, grab him out of their midst.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402336"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402336">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the headquarters.” BDAG 775 s.v. <span class="greek">παρεμβολή</span> 2 has “<i>barracks/headquarters</i> of the Roman troops in Jerusalem Ac 21:34, 37; 22:24; 23:10, 16, 32.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402337"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402337">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> The presence of <i>the Lord</i> indicated the vindicating presence and direction of God.</p></p>
<p id="n4402338"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402338">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “standing near Paul, said.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιστάς</span> (<span class="translit">epistas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402339"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402339">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402340"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402340">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Do not be afraid.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402342"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402342">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> Like Jesus went to Jerusalem, Paul would now go to <i>Rome</i>. This trip forms the concluding backdrop to Acts. This is the second notice about going to Rome (see Acts 19:21 for the first).</p></p>
<p id="n4402343"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402343">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “when it was day.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402344"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402344">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “forming a conspiracy, bound.” The participle <span class="greek">ποιήσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">poiēsantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402345"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402345">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 30.72 has ‘some Jews formed a conspiracy’ Ac 23:12”; BDAG 979 s.v. <span class="greek">συστροφή</span> 1 has “<i>Judeans came together in a mob</i> 23:12. But in the last pass. the word may also mean—2. the product of a clandestine gathering, <i>plot, conspiracy</i>” (see also Amos 7:10; Ps 63:3).</p></p>
<p id="n4402346"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402346">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bound themselves under a curse.” BDAG 63 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναθεματίζω</span> 1 has “trans. <i>put under a curse</i> <span class="greek">τινά</span> <i>someone</i>…pleonastically <span class="greek">ἀναθέματι ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἑαυτόν</span> Ac 23:14…<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἑαυτόν</span> vss. 12, 21, 13 v.l.” On such oaths see <i>m. Shevi’it</i> 3:1-5. The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402347"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402347">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “anything” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4402348"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402348">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 30.73 defines <span class="greek">συνωμοσία</span> (<span class="translit">sunōmosia</span>) as “a plan for taking secret action someone or some institution, with the implication of an oath binding the conspirators—‘conspiracy, plot.’…‘there were more than forty of them who formed this conspiracy’ Ac 23:13.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402349"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402349">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) was translated by the third person plural pronoun (“them”) and a new sentence begun in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402350"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402350">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going.” The participle <span class="greek">προσελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">proselthontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402351"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402351">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They went to the chief priests</i>. The fact that the high priest knew of this plot and did nothing shows the Jewish leadership would even become accomplices to murder to stop Paul. They would not allow Roman justice to take its course. Paul’s charge in v. 3 of superficially following the law is thus shown to be true.</p></p>
<p id="n4402352"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402352">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bound ourselves under a curse.” BDAG 63 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναθεματίζω</span> 1 has “trans. <i>put under a curse</i> <span class="greek">τινά</span> <i>someone</i>…pleonastically <span class="greek">ἀναθέματι ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἑαυτόν</span> Ac 23:14…<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἑαυτόν</span> vss. 12, 21, 13 v.l.” The pleonastic use <span class="greek">ἀναθέματι ἀνεθεματίσαμεν</span> (literally “we have cursed ourselves with a curse”) probably serves as an intensifier following Semitic usage, and is represented in the translation by the word “solemn.” On such oaths see <i>m. Nedarim</i> 3:1, 3.</p></p>
<p id="n4402353"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402353">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> This included both food and drink (<span class="greek">γεύομαι</span> [<span class="translit">geuomai</span>] is used of water turned to wine in John 2:9).</p></p>
<p id="n4402354"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402354">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Sanhedrin” (the Sanhedrin was the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n4402355"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402355">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 10.</p></p>
<p id="n4402356"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402356">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “decide.” BDAG 227 s.v. <span class="greek">διαγινώσκω</span> has “<span class="greek">ἀκριβέστερον τὰ περὶ αὐτοῦ</span> <i>to make a more thorough examination of his case</i> Ac 23:15.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402357"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402357">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “determine the things about him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402358"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402358">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression “more thorough inquiry” reflects the comparative form of <span class="greek">ἀκριβέστερον</span> (<span class="translit">akribesteron</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402359"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402359">59</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>“We are ready to kill him.”</i> Now those Jews involved in the conspiracy, along with the leaders as accomplices, are going to break one of the ten commandments.</p></p>
<p id="n4402360"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402360">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “this place” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4402361"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402361">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “plot” (BDAG 334 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐνέδρα</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402362"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402362">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “coming and entering…, he told.” The participles <span class="greek">παραγενόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">paragenomenos</span>) and <span class="greek">εἰσελθών</span> (<span class="translit">eiselthōn</span>) have been translated as finite verbs due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402363"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402363">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the headquarters.” BDAG 775 s.v. <span class="greek">παρεμβολή</span> 2 has “<i>barracks/headquarters</i> of the Roman troops in Jerusalem Ac 21:34, 37; 22:24; 23:10, 16, 32.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402364"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402364">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “calling…Paul said.” The participle <span class="greek">προσκαλεσάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">proskalesamenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402365"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402365">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402366"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402366">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 10.</p></p>
<p id="n4402367"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402367">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the centurion) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402368"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402368">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 10.</p></p>
<p id="n4402369"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402369">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “calling.” The participle <span class="greek">προσκαλεσάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">proskalesamenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402370"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402370">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 10.</p></p>
<p id="n4402371"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402371">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you have,” but the expression “have to report” in English could be understood to mean “must report” rather than “possess to report.” For this reason the nearly equivalent expression “want to report,” which is not subject to misunderstanding, was used in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402372"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402372">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402373"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402373">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Sanhedrin” (the Sanhedrin was the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n4402374"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402374">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do not be persuaded by them.” The passive construction <span class="greek">μὴ πεισθῇς αὐτοῖς</span> (<span class="translit">mē peisthēs autois</span>) has been converted to an active construction in the translation, and the phrase “to do this” supplied to indicate more clearly the object of their persuasion.</p></p>
<p id="n4402375"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402375">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “forty men of them.” In the expression <span class="greek">ἐξ αὐτῶν ἄνδρες</span> (<span class="translit">ex autōn andres</span>) “men” is somewhat redundant and has not been included in the English translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402376"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402376">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “are lying in wait for him” (BDAG 334 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐνεδρεύω</span>); see also v. 16.</p></p>
<p id="n4402377"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402377">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for him, who.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“who”) was translated by the third person plural pronoun (“they”) and a new sentence begun in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402378"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402378">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bound themselves under a curse.” BDAG 63 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναθεματίζω</span> 1 has “trans. <i>put under a curse</i> <span class="greek">τινά</span> <i>someone</i>…<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἑαυτόν</span> vss. 12, 21, 13 v.l.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402379"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402379">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “anything” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4402380"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402380">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “waiting for your approval,” “waiting for your agreement.” Since it would be possible to misunderstand the literal translation “waiting for your approval” to mean that the Jews were waiting for the commander’s approval to carry out their plot or to kill Paul (as if he were to be an accomplice to their plot), the object of the commander’s approval (their request to bring Paul to the council) has been specified in the translation as “their request.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402381"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402381">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 10.</p></p>
<p id="n4402382"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402382">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 760 s.v. <span class="greek">παραγγέλλω</span> has “to make an announcement about someth. that must be done, <i>give orders, command, instruct, direct</i> of all kinds of persons in authority, worldly rulers, Jesus, the apostles…<span class="greek">παραγγέλλειν</span> w. an inf. and <span class="greek">μή</span> comes to mean <i>forbid to do someth</i>.: <span class="greek">π</span>.<span class="greek"> τινί</span> w. aor. inf. Lk 5:14; 8:56; without the dat., which is easily supplied fr. the context Ac 23:22.” However, if the direct discourse which follows is to be retained in the translation, a different translation must be used since it is awkward to introduce direct discourse with the verb <i>to forbid</i>. Thus the alternative <i>to direct</i> was used.</p></p>
<p id="n4402383"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402383">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this verb, see BDAG 325-26 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐμφανίζω</span> 2. The term was frequently used of an official report to authorities. In modern terms, this was a police tip.</p></p>
<p id="n4402384"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402384">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Since this represents a response to the reported ambush, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the logical sequence.</p></p>
<p id="n4402385"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402385">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “summoning…he said.” The participle <span class="greek">προσκαλεσάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">proskalesamenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402386"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402386">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402387"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402387">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1. This was a journey of about 65 mi (just over 100 km).</p></p>
<p id="n4402388"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402388">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “cavalrymen.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402389"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402389">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> A military technical term of uncertain meaning. BDAG 217 s.v. <span class="greek">δεξιολάβος</span> states, “a word of uncertain mng., military t.t., acc. to Joannes Lydus…and Theophyl. Sim., Hist. 4, 1 a light-armed soldier, perh. <i>bowman, slinger</i>; acc. to a scholion in CMatthaei p. 342 <i>body-guard</i>….<i>Spearman</i> Goodspd., NRSV; ‘security officer’, GDKilpatrick, JTS 14, ’63, 393f.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>200 soldiers…along with 70 horsemen and 200 spearmen</i>. The resulting force assembled to guard Paul was almost a full cohort. The Roman commander was taking no chances, but was sending the issue up the chain of command to the procurator to decide.</p></p>
<p id="n4402390"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402390">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402391"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402391">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the third hour of the night.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402392"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402392">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “provide mounts to put Paul on.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Mounts for Paul to ride</i>. The fact they were riding horses indicates they wanted everyone to move as quickly as possible.</p></p>
<p id="n4402393"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402393">93</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Felix the governor</i> was Antonius Felix, a freedman of Antonia, mother of the Emperor Claudius. He was the brother of Pallas and became procurator of Palestine in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 52/53. His administration was notorious for its corruption, cynicism, and cruelty. According to the historian Tacitus (<i>History</i> 5.9) Felix “reveled in cruelty and lust, and wielded the power of a king with the mind of a slave.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402394"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402394">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Felix the procurator.” The official Roman title has been translated as “governor” (BDAG 433 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡγεμών</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4402395"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402395">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “writing.” Due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was begun here in the translation, supplying “he” (referring to the commanding officer, Claudius Lysias) as subject. The participle <span class="greek">γράψας</span> (<span class="translit">grapsas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402396"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402396">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having this form,” “having this content.” L&amp;N 33.48 has “<span class="greek">γράψσς ἐπιστολὴν ἔχουσαν τὸν τύπον τοῦτον</span> ‘then he wrote a letter that went like this’ Ac 23:25. It is also possible to understand <span class="greek">ἐπιστολή</span> in Ac 23:25 not as a content or message, but as an object (see 6.63).”</p></p>
<p id="n4402397"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402397">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Procurator.” The official Roman title has been translated as “governor” (BDAG 433 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡγεμών</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4402398"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402398">98</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Governor Felix</i>. See the note on <i>Felix</i> in v. 24.</p></p>
<p id="n4402399"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n4402399">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">συλλημφθέντα</span> (<span class="translit">sullēmphthenta</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. The remark reviews events of Acts 21:27-40.</p></p>
<p id="n44023100"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and was about to be killed by them.” The passive construction has been converted to an active one in the translation for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n44023101"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “approached.”</p></p>
<p id="n44023102"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> Normally this term means “army,” but according to BDAG 947 s.v. <span class="greek">στράτευμα</span>, “Of a smaller detachment of soldiers, sing. Ac 23:10, 27.” In the plural it can be translated “troops,” but it is singular here.</p></p>
<p id="n44023103"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> In Greek this is a present tense retained in indirect discourse.</p></p>
<p id="n44023104"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “citizen” is supplied here for emphasis and clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> The letter written by the Roman commander Claudius Lysias was somewhat self-serving. He made it sound as if the rescue of a <i>Roman citizen</i> had been a conscious act on his part. In fact, he had made the discovery of Paul’s Roman citizenship somewhat later. See Acts 21:37-39 and 22:24-29.</p></p>
<p id="n44023105"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “determine.”</p></p>
<p id="n44023106"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to know the charge on account of which they were accusing him.” This has been simplified to eliminate the prepositional phrase and relative pronoun <span class="greek">δι᾿ ἣν</span> (<span class="translit">di</span>’<span class="translit"> hēn</span>) similar to L&amp;N 27.8 which has “‘I wanted to find out what they were accusing him of, so I took him down to their Council’ Ac 23:28.”</p></p>
<p id="n44023107"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “their Sanhedrin” (the Sanhedrin was the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n44023108"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whom I found.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) has been changed to a personal pronoun (“he”) and a new sentence begun in the translation at this point.</p></p>
<p id="n44023109"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 428 s.v. <span class="greek">ζήτημα</span> states, “in our lit. only in Ac, w. the mng. it still has in Mod. Gk. <i>(controversial) question, issue, argument</i>…Ac 15:2; 26:3. <span class="greek">ζ</span>.<span class="greek"> περί τινος</span> <i>questions about someth</i>.…18:15; 25:19.—In 23:29, since <span class="greek">περί</span> had already been used, the subj. of the discussion is added in the gen. <span class="greek">ζ</span>.<span class="greek"> τοῦ νόμου αὐτῶν</span>.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>With reference to controversial questions</i>. Note how the “neutral” Roman authorities saw the issue. This was a religious rather than a civil dispute. See Acts 18:15.</p></p>
<p id="n44023110"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but having no charge worthy of death or imprisonment.” BDAG 273-74 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔγκλημα</span> 1 has “legal t.t.…<span class="greek">ἔ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἄξιον θανάτου ἢ δεσμῶν</span> <i>a charge deserving death or imprisonment</i> 23:29.” </p><p><b>sn</b> Despite the official assessment that <i>no charge against him deserved death or imprisonment</i>, there was no effort to release Paul.</p></p>
<p id="n44023111"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It being revealed to me.” The participle <span class="greek">μηνυθείσης</span> (<span class="translit">mēnutheisēs</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n44023112"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term translated “plot” here is a different one than the one in Acts 23:16 (see BDAG 368 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιβουλή</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n44023113"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the things against him.” This could be rendered as “accusations,” “grievances,” or “charges,” but since “ordered his accusers to state their accusations” sounds redundant in English, “charges” was used instead.</p></p>
<p id="n44023114"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 237-38 s.v. <span class="greek">διατάσσω</span> 2 has “<span class="greek">κατὰ τὸ δ</span>.<span class="greek"> αὐτοῖς</span> <i>in accordance w. their orders</i>…Ac 23:31.”</p></p>
<p id="n44023115"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “taking.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναλαβόντες</span> (<span class="translit">analabontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44023116"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023116">116</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Antipatris</i> was a city in Judea about 35 mi (55 km) northwest of Jerusalem (about halfway to Caesarea). It was mentioned several times by Josephus (<i>Ant</i>. 13.15.1 [13.390]; <i>J. W</i>. 1.4.7 [1.99]).</p></p>
<p id="n44023117"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “letting.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐάσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">easantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44023118"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “cavalrymen.”</p></p>
<p id="n44023119"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the headquarters.” BDAG 775 s.v. <span class="greek">παρεμβολή</span> 2 has “<i>barracks/headquarters</i> of the Roman troops in Jerusalem Ac 21:34, 37; 22:24; 23:10, 16, 32.”</p></p>
<p id="n44023120"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who, coming to Caesarea.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek construction, a new sentence was begun here in the translation. The relative pronoun (“who”) has been replaced with the referent (the horsemen) in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44023121"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023121">121</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1. It was about 30 mi (50 km) from Antipatris.</p></p>
<p id="n44023122"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 778 s.v. <span class="greek">παρίστημι</span>/<span class="greek">παριστάνω</span> 1.b has “<i>present, represent</i>—<span class="greek">α</span>. lit. <span class="greek">τινά τινι</span> <i>someone to someone</i> <span class="greek">παρέστησαν τὸν Παῦλον αὐτῷ</span> Ac 23:33.”</p></p>
<p id="n44023123"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the governor) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44023124"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having read.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναγνούς</span> (<span class="translit">anagnous</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44023125"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the letter” are not in the Greek text but are implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n44023126"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and asking.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπερωτήσας</span> (<span class="translit">eperōtēsas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb and <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) left untranslated due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44023127"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023127">127</a> <p><b>sn</b> Governor Felix <i>asked what province he was from</i> to determine whether he had legal jurisdiction over Paul. He could have sent him to his home province for trial, but decided to hear the case himself.</p></p>
<p id="n44023128"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and learning.” The participle <span class="greek">πυθόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">puthomenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44023129"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023129">129</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cilicia</i> was a province in southeastern Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n44023130"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I will hear your case.” BDAG 231 s.v. <span class="greek">διακούω</span> has “as legal t.t. give someone an opportunity to be heard in court, <i>give someone</i> (<span class="greek">τινός</span>) <i>a hearing</i> Ac 23:35”; L&amp;N 56.13 has “to give a judicial hearing in a legal matter—‘to hear a case, to provide a legal hearing, to hear a case in court.’”</p></p>
<p id="n44023131"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ordering.” The participle <span class="greek">κελεύσας</span> (<span class="translit">keleusas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb and a new sentence begun here due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence. “Then” has also been supplied to indicate the logical and temporal sequence. </p></p>
<p id="n44023132"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44023133"><a href="file1085.xhtml#n44023133">133</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Herod’s palace</i> (<i>Grk</i> “Herod’s praetorium”) was the palace built in Caesarea by Herod the Great. See Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 15.9.6 (15.331). These events belong to the period of <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 56-57.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
