<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Hebrews 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Warning Against Drifting Away</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Therefore we must pay closer attention to what we have heard, so that we do not drift away. <span class="verse">2:2</span> For if the message spoken through angels<sup><a id="n580021" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n580021">1</a></sup> proved to be so firm that every violation<sup><a id="n580022" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n580022">2</a></sup> or disobedience received its just penalty, <span class="verse">2:3</span> how will we escape if we neglect such a great salvation? It was first communicated through the Lord and was confirmed to us by those who heard him, <span class="verse">2:4</span> while God confirmed their witness<sup><a id="n580023" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n580023">3</a></sup> with signs and wonders and various miracles and gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed<sup><a id="n580024" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n580024">4</a></sup> according to his will. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exposition of Psalm 8: Jesus and the Destiny of Humanity</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:5</span> For he did not put the world to come,<sup><a id="n580025" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n580025">5</a></sup> about which we are speaking,<sup><a id="n580026" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n580026">6</a></sup> under the control of angels. <span class="verse">2:6</span> Instead someone testified somewhere: </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<b><i>What is man that you think of him</i></b><sup><a id="n580027" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n580027">7</a></sup> <b><i>or</i> <i>the son of man that you care for him?</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> <i><b>You made him lower than the angels for a little while</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>You crowned him with glory and honor</b></i>.<sup><a id="n580028" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n580028">8</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> <i><b>You put all things under his control</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n580029" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n580029">9</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext">For when he <b><i>put</i></b> <b><i>all things under his control</i></b>, he left nothing outside of his control. At present we do not yet see <b><i>all things under his control</i></b>,<sup><a id="n5800210" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800210">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:9</span> but we see Jesus, who was made <b><i>lower than the angels for a little while</i></b>,<sup><a id="n5800211" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800211">11</a></sup> now crowned with glory and honor because he suffered death,<sup><a id="n5800212" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800212">12</a></sup> so that by God’s grace he would experience<sup><a id="n5800213" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800213">13</a></sup> death on behalf of everyone. <span class="verse">2:10</span> For it was fitting for him, for whom and through whom all things exist,<sup><a id="n5800214" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800214">14</a></sup> in bringing many sons to glory, to make the pioneer<sup><a id="n5800215" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800215">15</a></sup> of their salvation perfect through sufferings. <span class="verse">2:11</span> For indeed he who makes holy and those being made holy all have the same origin,<sup><a id="n5800216" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800216">16</a></sup> and so<sup><a id="n5800217" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800217">17</a></sup> he is not ashamed to call them brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5800218" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800218">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:12</span> saying, “<b><i>I will proclaim your name to my brothers;</i></b><sup><a id="n5800219" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800219">19</a></sup> <b><i>in</i> <i>the midst of the assembly I will praise you</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n5800220" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800220">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:13</span> Again he says,<sup><a id="n5800221" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800221">21</a></sup> “I will be confident in him,” and again, “<i><b>Here I am</b>,</i><sup><a id="n5800222" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800222">22</a></sup> <b><i>with</i></b><sup><a id="n5800223" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800223">23</a></sup> <b><i>the children God has given me</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n5800224" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800224">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:14</span> Therefore, since the children share in flesh and blood, he likewise shared in<sup><a id="n5800225" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800225">25</a></sup> their humanity,<sup><a id="n5800226" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800226">26</a></sup> so that through death he could destroy<sup><a id="n5800227" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800227">27</a></sup> the one who holds the power of death (that is, the devil), <span class="verse">2:15</span> and set free those who were held in slavery all their lives by their fear of death. <span class="verse">2:16</span> For surely his concern is not for angels, but he is concerned for Abraham’s descendants. <span class="verse">2:17</span> Therefore he had<sup><a id="n5800228" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800228">28</a></sup> to be made like his brothers and sisters<sup><a id="n5800229" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800229">29</a></sup> in every respect, so that he could become a merciful and faithful high priest in things relating to God, to make atonement<sup><a id="n5800230" href="file1193_notes.xhtml#n5800230">30</a></sup> for the sins of the people. <span class="verse">2:18</span> For since he himself suffered when he was tempted, he is able to help those who are tempted. </p>

</body>
</html>