<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 15</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 15</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation for the Strong to Help the Weak</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:1</span> But we who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak, and not just please ourselves.<sup><a id="n450151" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n450151">1</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:2</span> Let each of us please his neighbor for his good to build him up. <span class="verse">15:3</span> For even Christ did not please himself, but just as it is written, “<b><i>The insults of those who insult you have fallen on me</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n450152" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n450152">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:4</span> For everything that was written in former times was written for our instruction, so that through endurance and through encouragement of the scriptures we may have hope. <span class="verse">15:5</span> Now may the God of endurance and comfort give you unity with one another<sup><a id="n450153" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n450153">3</a></sup> in accordance with Christ Jesus, <span class="verse">15:6</span> so that together you may with one voice glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Mutual Acceptance</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:7</span> Receive one another, then, just as Christ also received you, to God’s glory. <span class="verse">15:8</span> For I tell you that Christ has become a servant of the circumcised<sup><a id="n450154" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n450154">4</a></sup> on behalf of God’s truth to confirm the promises made to the fathers,<sup><a id="n450155" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n450155">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:9</span> and thus the Gentiles glorify God for his mercy.<sup><a id="n450156" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n450156">6</a></sup> As it is written, “<i><b>Because of this I will confess you among the Gentiles, and I will sing praises to your name</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n450157" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n450157">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:10</span> And again it says: “<i><b>Rejoice, O Gentiles, with his people</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n450158" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n450158">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:11</span> And again, “<i><b>Praise the Lord all you Gentiles, and let all the peoples praise him</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n450159" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n450159">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:12</span> And again Isaiah says, “<i><b>The root of Jesse will come, and the one who rises to rule over the Gentiles, in him will the Gentiles hope</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4501510" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501510">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">15:13</span> Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you believe in him,<sup><a id="n4501511" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501511">11</a></sup> so that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Motivation for Writing the Letter</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:14</span> But I myself am fully convinced about you, my brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n4501512" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501512">12</a></sup> that you yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and able to instruct one another. <span class="verse">15:15</span> But I have written more boldly to you on some points so as to remind you, because of the grace given to me by God <span class="verse">15:16</span> to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles. I serve<sup><a id="n4501513" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501513">13</a></sup> the gospel of God<sup><a id="n4501514" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501514">14</a></sup> like a priest, so that the Gentiles may become an acceptable offering,<sup><a id="n4501515" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501515">15</a></sup> sanctified by the Holy Spirit. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:17</span> So I boast<sup><a id="n4501516" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501516">16</a></sup> in Christ Jesus about the things that pertain to God. <span class="verse">15:18</span> For I will not dare to speak of anything except what Christ has accomplished through me in order to bring about the obedience<sup><a id="n4501517" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501517">17</a></sup> of the Gentiles, by word and deed, <span class="verse">15:19</span> in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of the Spirit of God. So from Jerusalem even as far as Illyricum I have fully preached the gospel of Christ. <span class="verse">15:20</span> And in this way I desire to preach where Christ has not been named, so as not to build on another person’s foundation, <span class="verse">15:21</span> but as it is written: “<i><b>Those who were not told about him will see, and those who have not heard will understand</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4501518" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501518">18</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Intention of Visiting the Romans</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:22</span> This is the reason I was often hindered from coming to you. <span class="verse">15:23</span> But now there is nothing more to keep me<sup><a id="n4501519" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501519">19</a></sup> in these regions, and I have for many years desired<sup><a id="n4501520" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501520">20</a></sup> to come to you <span class="verse">15:24</span> when I go to Spain. For I hope to visit you when I pass through and that you will help me<sup><a id="n4501521" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501521">21</a></sup> on my journey there, after I have enjoyed your company for a while.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:25</span> But now I go to Jerusalem to minister to the saints. <span class="verse">15:26</span> For Macedonia and Achaia are pleased to make some contribution for the poor among the saints in Jerusalem. <span class="verse">15:27</span> For they were pleased to do this, and indeed they are indebted to the Jerusalem saints.<sup><a id="n4501522" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501522">22</a></sup> For if the Gentiles have shared in their spiritual things, they are obligated also to minister to them in material things. <span class="verse">15:28</span> Therefore after I have completed this and have safely delivered this bounty to them,<sup><a id="n4501523" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501523">23</a></sup> I will set out for Spain by way of you, <span class="verse">15:29</span> and I know that when I come to you I will come in the fullness of Christ’s blessing. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">15:30</span> Now I urge you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n4501524" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501524">24</a></sup> through our Lord Jesus Christ and through the love of the Spirit, to join fervently with me in prayer to God on my behalf. <span class="verse">15:31</span> Pray<sup><a id="n4501525" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501525">25</a></sup> that I may be rescued from those who are disobedient in Judea and that my ministry in Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints, <span class="verse">15:32</span> so that by God’s will I may come to you with joy and be refreshed in your company. <span class="verse">15:33</span> Now may the God of peace be with all of you. Amen.<sup><a id="n4501526" href="file1106_notes.xhtml#n4501526">26</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>