<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Corinthians 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Corinthians<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Thorn in the Flesh</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> It is necessary to go on boasting.<sup><a id="n470121" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n470121">1</a></sup> Though it is not profitable, I will go on to visions and revelations from the Lord. <span class="verse">12:2</span> I know a man in Christ who fourteen years ago (whether in the body or out of the body I do not know, God knows) was caught up to the third heaven. <span class="verse">12:3</span> And I know that this man (whether in the body or apart from the body I do not know, God knows) <span class="verse">12:4</span> was caught up into paradise<sup><a id="n470122" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n470122">2</a></sup> and heard things too sacred to be put into words,<sup><a id="n470123" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n470123">3</a></sup> things that a person<sup><a id="n470124" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n470124">4</a></sup> is not permitted to speak. <span class="verse">12:5</span> On behalf of such an individual I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast, except about my weaknesses. <span class="verse">12:6</span> For even if I wish to boast, I will not be a fool, for I would be telling<sup><a id="n470125" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n470125">5</a></sup> the truth, but I refrain from this so that no one may regard<sup><a id="n470126" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n470126">6</a></sup> me beyond what he sees in me or what he hears from me, <span class="verse">12:7</span> even because of the extraordinary character of the revelations. Therefore,<sup><a id="n470127" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n470127">7</a></sup> so that I would not become arrogant, a thorn in the flesh was given to me, a messenger of Satan to trouble<sup><a id="n470128" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n470128">8</a></sup> me—so that I would not become arrogant.<sup><a id="n470129" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n470129">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:8</span> I asked the Lord three times about this, that it would depart from me. <span class="verse">12:9</span> But<sup><a id="n4701210" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701210">10</a></sup> he said to me, “My grace is enough<sup><a id="n4701211" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701211">11</a></sup> for you, for my<sup><a id="n4701212" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701212">12</a></sup> power is made perfect<sup><a id="n4701213" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701213">13</a></sup> in weakness.” So then, I will boast most gladly<sup><a id="n4701214" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701214">14</a></sup> about my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may reside in<sup><a id="n4701215" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701215">15</a></sup> me. <span class="verse">12:10</span> Therefore I am content with<sup><a id="n4701216" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701216">16</a></sup> weaknesses, with insults, with troubles, with persecutions and difficulties<sup><a id="n4701217" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701217">17</a></sup> for the sake of Christ, for whenever I am weak, then I am strong. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Signs of an Apostle</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:11</span> I have become a fool. You yourselves forced me to do it, for I should have been commended by you. For I lack nothing in comparison<sup><a id="n4701218" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701218">18</a></sup> to those “super-apostles,” even though I am nothing. <span class="verse">12:12</span> Indeed, the signs of an apostle were performed among you with great perseverance<sup><a id="n4701219" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701219">19</a></sup> by signs and wonders and powerful deeds.<sup><a id="n4701220" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701220">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:13</span> For how<sup><a id="n4701221" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701221">21</a></sup> were you treated worse than the other churches, except that I myself was not a burden to you? Forgive me this injustice! <span class="verse">12:14</span> Look, for the third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be a burden to you, because I do not want your possessions, but you. For children should not have<sup><a id="n4701222" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701222">22</a></sup> to save up for their parents, but parents for their children. <span class="verse">12:15</span> Now I will most gladly spend and be spent for your lives!<sup><a id="n4701223" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701223">23</a></sup> If I love you more, am I to be loved less? <span class="verse">12:16</span> But be that as it may, I have not burdened you. Yet because I was a crafty person, I took you in by deceit! <span class="verse">12:17</span> I have not taken advantage of you through anyone I have sent to you, have I?<sup><a id="n4701224" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701224">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:18</span> I urged Titus to visit you<sup><a id="n4701225" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701225">25</a></sup> and I sent our<sup><a id="n4701226" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701226">26</a></sup> brother along with him. Titus did not take advantage of you, did he?<sup><a id="n4701227" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701227">27</a></sup> Did we not conduct ourselves in the same spirit? Did we not behave in the same way?<sup><a id="n4701228" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701228">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:19</span> Have you been thinking all this time<sup><a id="n4701229" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701229">29</a></sup> that we have been defending ourselves to you? We are speaking in Christ before God, and everything we do, dear friends, is to build you up.<sup><a id="n4701230" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701230">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:20</span> For I am afraid that somehow when I come I will not find you what I wish, and you will find me<sup><a id="n4701231" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701231">31</a></sup> not what you wish. I am afraid that<sup><a id="n4701232" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701232">32</a></sup> somehow there may be quarreling, jealousy, intense anger, selfish ambition,<sup><a id="n4701233" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701233">33</a></sup> slander, gossip, arrogance, and disorder. <span class="verse">12:21</span> I am afraid that<sup><a id="n4701234" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701234">34</a></sup> when I come again, my God may humiliate me before you, and I will grieve for<sup><a id="n4701235" href="file1137_notes.xhtml#n4701235">35</a></sup> many of those who previously sinned and have not repented of the impurity, sexual immorality, and licentiousness that they have practiced. </p>

</body>
</html>