<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 11</h2>
<p id="n4601015"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n4601015">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>Everything is lawful</i>.” Here again Paul cites certain slogans the Corinthians used to justify their behavior (cf. 6:12-13; 7:1; 8:1, 4). Paul agrees with the slogans in part, but corrects them to show how the Corinthians have misused these ideas.</p></p>
<p id="n4601016"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n4601016">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “builds up.” The object “others” is not expressed but is implied, as v. 24 shows. Paul picks up a theme he introduced at the start of this section of the letter (8:1).</p></p>
<p id="n4601017"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n4601017">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 24:1; an allusion to Pss 50:12; 89:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4601018"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n4601018">18</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Byzantine text-form and a few other witnesses (H<sup>c</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) essentially duplicate v. 26 at the end of this verse (with <span class="greek">γάρ</span> [<span class="translit">gar</span>, “for”] in second instead of third position), which itself is a quotation from Ps 24:1 (23:1 LXX). Not only is there a vast number of early, significant, and diverse witnesses that lack this extra material (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C* D F G H* P 33 81 365 630 1175 1739 1881 2464 latt co), but the quotation seems out of place at this point in the discourse for Paul is here discussing reasons <i>not</i> to partake of food that has been sacrificed to idols. Perhaps scribes felt that since food is from the Lord, to eat meat sacrificed to idols contradicts that belief. Either way, the better witnesses lack the clause which, had it been authentic to v. 28, would have not occasioned such a widespread excision. The evidence is thus compelling for the shorter reading.</p></p>
<p id="n4601019"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n4601019">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about that for which”; the referent (the food) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4601020"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n4601020">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the Greek word translated “benefit” occurs only once in this verse, the Greek article occurs twice. This indicates an implied repetition of the term, which has been included twice in the translation for the sake of clarity and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n460111"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n460111">1</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Western and Byzantine texts, as well as one or two Alexandrian <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy), combine in reading <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> (<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>, “brothers”) here, while the Alexandrian witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C P 81 630 1175 1739 1881 2464 co) largely lack the address. The addition of <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> is apparently a motivated reading, however, for scribes would have naturally wanted to add it to <span class="greek">ἐπαινῶ δὲ ὑμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">epainō de humas</span>, “now I praise you”), especially as this begins a new section. On the other hand, it is difficult to explain how the shorter reading could have arisen from the longer one. Thus, on both internal and external grounds, the shorter reading is strongly preferred. </p></p>
<p id="n460112"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n460112">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the husband is the head of his wife.” The same Greek words translated “man” and “woman” can mean, as determined by context, “husband” and “wife” respectively. Such an approach is followed by NAB, TEV, NRSV, and NLT (with some variations).</p></p>
<p id="n460113"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n460113">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul does not use a word specifying what type of “covering” is meant (veil, hat, etc.). The Greek word he uses here (<span class="greek">ἐξουσία</span> <span class="translit">exousia</span>; translated <i>symbol of authority</i>) could be (1) a figure of speech that may substitute the result (the right to participate in worship) for the appropriate appearance that makes it possible (the covered head). Or (2) it refers to the outward symbol (having the head covered) as representing the inward attitude the woman is to possess (deference to male leadership in the church).</p></p>
<p id="n460114"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n460114">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul does not explain this reference to <i>the angels</i>, and its point is not entirely clear. It seems to reflect an awareness that angels are witnesses to church life (cf. Eph 3:10) and would be particularly sensitive to resistance against God’s created order.</p></p>
<p id="n460115"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n460115">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul does not mean <i>nature</i> in the sense of “the natural world” or “Mother Nature.” It denotes “the way things are” because of God’s design.</p></p>
<p id="n460116"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n460116">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> No word for veil or head covering occurs in vv. 3-14 (see the note on <i>authority</i> in v. 10). That the hair is regarded by Paul as a <i>covering</i> in v. 15 is not necessarily an argument that the hair is the same as the head covering that he is describing in the earlier verses (esp. v. 10). Throughout this unit of material, Paul points out the <i>similarities</i> of long hair with a head covering. But his doing so seems to suggest that the two are not to be identified with each other. Precisely because they are similar they do not appear to be identical (cf. vv. 5, 6, 7, 10, 13). If head covering = long hair, then what does v. 6 mean (“For if a woman will not cover her head, she should cut off her hair”)? This suggests that the covering is not the same as the hair itself.</p></p>
<p id="n460117"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n460117">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those approved may be evident among you.”</p></p>
<p id="n460118"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n460118">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “first” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. It has been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n460119"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n460119">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in this manner.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601110"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n4601110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word more literally means, “judging between, recognizing, distinguishing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601111"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n4601111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “are asleep.” The verb <span class="greek">κοιμάω</span> (<span class="translit">koimaō</span>) literally means “sleep,” but it is often used in the Bible as a euphemism for the death of a believer.</p></p>
<p id="n4601112"><a href="file1119.xhtml#n4601112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
