<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Colossians 1</h2>
<p id="n510011"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n510011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul.” The word “from” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n510012"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n510012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and faithful.” The construction in Greek (as well as Paul’s style) suggests that the saints are identical to the faithful; hence, the <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) is best left untranslated (cf. Eph 1:1). See <i>ExSyn</i> 281-82.</p></p>
<p id="n510013"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n510013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” or “fellow Christians” as here (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited).</p></p>
<p id="n510014"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n510014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Grace to you and peace.”</p></p>
<p id="n510015"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n510015">5</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including some significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C F G I [P] 075 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it bo Hier), read “and the Lord Jesus Christ” at the end of this verse, no doubt to conform the wording to the typical Pauline salutation. However, excellent and early witnesses (B D K L <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 81 1175 1505 1739 1881 <i>al</i> sa Ambst) lack this phrase. Since the omission is inexplicable as arising from the longer reading (otherwise, these <span class="smcaps">mss</span> would surely have deleted the phrase in the rest of the <i>corpus Paulinum</i>), it is surely authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n510016"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n510016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The adverb <span class="greek">πάντοτε</span> (<span class="translit">pantote</span>) is understood to modify the indicative <span class="greek">εὐχαριστοῦμεν</span> (<span class="translit">eucharistoumen</span>) because it precedes <span class="greek">περὶ ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">peri humōn</span>) which probably modifies the indicative and not the participle <span class="greek">προσευχόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">proseuchomenoi</span>). But see 1:9 where the same expression occurs and <span class="greek">περὶ ὑμῶν</span> modifies the participle “praying” (<span class="greek">προσευχόμενοι</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n510017"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n510017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The adverbial participle <span class="greek">ἀκούσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">akousantes</span>) is understood to be temporal and translated with “since.” A causal idea may also be in the apostle’s mind, but the context emphasizes temporal ideas, e.g., “from the day” (v. 6).</p></p>
<p id="n510018"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n510018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Col 1:3-8 form one long sentence in the Greek text and have been divided at the end of v. 4 and v. 6 and within v. 6 for clarity, in keeping with the tendency in contemporary English toward shorter sentences. Thus the phrase “Your faith and love have arisen from the hope” is literally “because of the hope.” The perfect tense “have arisen” was chosen in the English to reflect the fact that the recipients of the letter had acquired this hope at conversion in the past, but that it still remains and motivates them to trust in Christ and to love one another. </p></p>
<p id="n510019"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n510019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 113 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπόκειμαι</span> 2 renders <span class="greek">ἀποκειμένην</span> (<span class="translit">apokeimenēn</span>) with the expression “<i>reserved</i>” in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n5100110"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “the gospel” (<span class="greek">τοῦ εὐαγγελίου</span>, <span class="translit">tou euangeliou</span>) is in apposition to “the word of truth” (<span class="greek">τῷ λόγῳ τῆς ἀληθείας</span>, <span class="translit">tō logō tēs alētheias</span>) as indicated in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n5100111"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “just as in the entire world it is bearing fruit.” The antecedent (“the gospel”) of the implied subject (“it”) of <span class="greek">ἐστιν</span> (<span class="translit">estin</span>) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5100112"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though the participles are periphrastic with the present tense verb <span class="greek">ἐστίν</span> (<span class="translit">estin</span>), the presence of the temporal indicator “from the day” in the next clause indicates that this is a present tense that reaches into the past and should be translated as “has been bearing fruit and growing.” For a discussion of this use of the present tense, see <i>ExSyn</i> 519-20.</p></p>
<p id="n5100113"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “learned it.” The Greek text simply has “you learned” without the reference to “the gospel,” but “the gospel” is supplied to clarify the sense of the clause. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n5100114"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word translated “fellow slave” is <span class="greek">σύνδουλος</span> (<span class="translit">sundoulos</span>); the <span class="greek">σύν</span>- prefix here denotes association. Though <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> is normally translated “servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. Also, many slaves in the Roman world became slaves through Rome’s subjugation of conquered nations, kidnapping, or by being born into slave households. </p></p>
<p id="n5100115"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek text has “<i>who</i> (<span class="greek">ὅς</span>, <span class="translit">hos</span>) is a faithful minister.” The above translation conveys the antecedent of the relative pronoun quite well and avoids the redundancy with the following substantival participle of v. 8, namely, “who told” (<span class="greek">ὁ δηλώσας</span>, <span class="translit">ho dēlōsas</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n5100116"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100116">16</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Judging by the superior witnesses for the first person pronoun <span class="greek">ἡμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">hēmōn</span>, “us”; <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B D* F G 326* 1505) vs. the second person pronoun <span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">humōn</span>, “you”; found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> C D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 33 1175 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy co), <span class="greek">ἡμῶν</span> should be regarded as the initial reading. Although it is possible that <span class="greek">ἡμῶν</span> was an early alteration of <span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> (either unintentionally, as dittography, since it comes seventeen letters after the previous <span class="greek">ἡμῶν</span>; or intentionally, to conform to the surrounding first person pronouns), this supposition is difficult to maintain in light of the varied and valuable witnesses for this reading. Further, the second person is both embedded in the verb <span class="greek">ἐμάθετε</span> (<span class="translit">emathete</span>) and is explicit in v. 8 (<span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span>). Hence, the motivation to change to the first person pronoun is counterbalanced by such evidence. The second person pronoun may have been introduced unintentionally via homoioarcton with the <span class="greek">ὑπέρ</span> (<span class="translit">huper</span>) that immediately precedes it. As well, the second person reading is somewhat harder for it seems to address Epaphras’ role only in relation to Paul and his colleagues, rather than in relation to the Colossians. Nevertheless, the decision must be based ultimately on external evidence (since the internal evidence can be variously interpreted), and this strongly supports <span class="greek">ἡμῶν</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n5100117"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “heard about it”; <i>Grk</i> “heard.” There is no direct object stated in the Greek (direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context). A direct object is expected by an English reader, however, so most translations supply one. Here, however, it is not entirely clear what the author “heard”: a number of translations supply “it” (so KJV, NASB, NRSV; NAB “this”), but this could refer back either to (1) “your love in the Spirit” at the end of v. 8, or (2) “your faith in Christ Jesus and the love that you have for all the saints” (v. 4). In light of this uncertainty, other translations supply “about you” (TEV, NIV, CEV, NLT). This is preferred by the present translation since, while it does not resolve the ambiguity entirely, it does make it less easy for the English reader to limit the reference only to “your love in the Spirit” at the end of v. 8.</p></p>
<p id="n5100118"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “God” does not appear in the Greek text, but the following reference to “the knowledge of <i>his</i> will” makes it clear that “God” is in view as the object of the “praying and asking,” and should therefore be included in the English translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5100119"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clause has been translated as substantival, indicating the content of the prayer and asking. The idea of purpose may also be present in this clause.</p></p>
<p id="n5100120"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The infinitive <span class="greek">περιπατῆσαι</span> (<span class="translit">peripatēsai</span>, “to walk, to live, to live one’s life”) is best taken as an infinitive of purpose related to “praying” (<span class="greek">προσευχόμενοι</span>, <span class="translit">proseuchomenoi</span>) and “asking” (<span class="greek">αἰτούμενοι</span>, <span class="translit">aitoumenoi</span>) in v. 9 and is thus translated as “<i>that</i> you may live.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100121"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 129 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀρεσκεία</span> states that <span class="greek">ἀρεσκείαν</span> (<span class="translit">areskeian</span>) refers to a “<i>desire to please</i> <span class="greek">εἰς πᾶσαν ἀ</span>. <i>to please</i> (the Lord) <i>in all respects</i> Col 1:10.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100122"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression “for the display of” is an attempt to convey in English the force of the Greek preposition <span class="greek">εἰς</span> (<span class="translit">eis</span>) in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n5100123"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 473 s.v. <span class="greek">ἱκανόω</span> states, “<span class="greek">τινὰ εἴς τι</span> <i>someone for someth</i>. Col 1:12.” The point of the text is that God has qualified the saints for a “share” or “portion” in the inheritance of the saints.</p></p>
<p id="n5100124"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the inheritance of the saints.” The genitive noun <span class="greek">τῶν ἁγίων</span> (<span class="translit">tōn hagiōn</span>) is a possessive genitive: “the saints’ inheritance.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100125"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">autou</span>) has been translated as a subjective genitive (“he loves”).</p></p>
<p id="n5100126"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100126">26</a> <p><b>tc</b> <span class="greek">διὰ τοῦ αἵματος</span> <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">dia tou haimatos autou</span>, “through his blood”) is read at this juncture by several minuscule <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (614 630 1505 2464) as well as a few, mostly secondary, versional and patristic witnesses. But the reading was prompted by the parallel in Eph 1:7 where the wording is solid. If these words had been in the original of Colossians, why would scribes omit them here but not in Eph 1:7? Further, the testimony on behalf of the shorter reading is quite overwhelming: <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 0150 6 33 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt co as well as several other versions and fathers. The conviction that “through his blood” is not authentic in Col 1:14 is as strong as the conviction that these words are authentic in Eph 1:7. </p></p>
<p id="n5100127"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100127">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> This passage has been typeset as poetry because many scholars regard this passage as poetic or hymnic. These terms are used broadly to refer to the genre of writing, not to the content. There are two broad criteria for determining if a passage is poetic or hymnic: “(a) <i>stylistic:</i> a certain rhythmical lilt when the passages are read aloud, the presence of <i>parallelismus membrorum</i> (i.e., an arrangement into couplets), the semblance of some metre, and the presence of rhetorical devices such as alliteration, <i>chiasmus</i>, and antithesis; and (b) <i>linguistic:</i> an unusual vocabulary, particularly the presence of theological terms, which is different from the surrounding context” (P. T. O’Brien, <i>Philippians</i> [NIGTC], 188-89). Classifying a passage as hymnic or poetic is important because understanding this genre can provide keys to interpretation. However, not all scholars agree that the above criteria are present in this passage, so the decision to typeset it as poetry should be viewed as a tentative decision about its genre.</p></p>
<p id="n5100128"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">πρωτότοκος</span> (<span class="translit">prōtotokos</span>) could refer either to first in order of time, such as a first born child, or it could refer to one who is preeminent in rank. M. J. Harris, <i>Colossians and Philemon</i> (EGGNT), 43, expresses the meaning of the word well: “The ‘firstborn’ was either the eldest child in a family or a person of preeminent rank. The use of this term to describe the Davidic king in Ps 88:28 LXX (=Ps 89:27 EVV), ‘I will also appoint him my firstborn (<span class="greek">πρωτότοκον</span>), the most exalted of the kings of the earth,’ indicates that it can denote supremacy in rank as well as priority in time. But whether the <span class="greek">πρωτό</span>- element in the word denotes time, rank, or both, the significance of the -<span class="greek">τοκος</span> element as indicating birth or origin (from <span class="greek">τίκτω</span>, give birth to) has been virtually lost except in ref. to lit. birth.” In Col 1:15 the emphasis is on the priority of Jesus’ rank as over and above creation (cf. 1:16 and the “for” clause referring to Jesus as Creator).</p></p>
<p id="n5100129"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive construction <span class="greek">πάσης κτίσεως</span> (<span class="translit">pasēs ktiseōs</span>) is a genitive of subordination and is therefore translated as “over all creation.” See <i>ExSyn</i> 103-4. </p></p>
<p id="n5100130"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 579 s.v. <span class="greek">κυριότης</span> 3 suggests “<i>bearers of the ruling powers, dominions</i>” here.</p></p>
<p id="n5100131"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 973 s.v. <span class="greek">συνίστημι</span> B.3 suggests “<i>continue, endure, exist, hold together</i>” here.</p></p>
<p id="n5100132"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the term “firstborn” in 1:15. Here the reference to Jesus as the “firstborn from the dead” seems to be arguing for a chronological priority, i.e., Jesus was <i>the first</i> to rise from the dead.</p></p>
<p id="n5100133"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in order that he may become in all things, himself, first.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100134"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The noun “God” does not appear in the Greek text, but the similar phrase “all the fullness of deity” in 2:9 lends credence to God as the subject of <span class="greek">εὐδόκησεν</span> (<span class="translit">eudokēsen</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n5100135"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek article <span class="greek">τό</span> (<span class="translit">to</span>), insofar as it relates to God, may be translated as a possessive pronoun, i.e., “his.” BDAG 404 s.v. <span class="greek">εὐδοκέω</span> 1 translates the phrase as “all the fullness willed to dwell in him” thus leaving the referent as impersonal. Insofar as Paul is alluding to the so-called emanations from God this is acceptable. But the fact that “the fullness” dwells in a person (i.e., “in him”) seems to argue for the translation “his fullness” where “his” refers to God.</p></p>
<p id="n5100136"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The aorist verb <span class="greek">κατοικῆσαι</span> (<span class="translit">katoikēsai</span>) could be taken as an ingressive, in which case it refers to the incarnation and may be translated as “begin to dwell, to take up residence.” It is perhaps better, though, to take it as a constative aorist and simply a reference to the <i>fact</i> that the fullness of God dwells in Jesus Christ. This is a permanent dwelling, though, not a temporary one, as the present tense in 2:9 makes clear.</p></p>
<p id="n5100137"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (the Son; see v. 13) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5100138"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100138">38</a> <p><b>tc</b> The presence or absence of the second occurrence of the phrase <span class="greek">δι᾿ αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">di</span>’<span class="translit"> autou</span>, “through him”) is a difficult textual problem to solve. External evidence is fairly evenly divided. Many ancient and excellent witnesses lack the phrase (B D* F G I 0278 81 1175 1739 1881 2464 <i>al</i> latt sa), but equally significant witnesses have it (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 048<sup>vid</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> sy bo). Both readings have strong Alexandrian support, which makes the problem difficult to decide on external evidence alone. The phrase, however, has stronger evidence geographically. Internal evidence points to the inclusion of the phrase as autographic. The word immediately preceding the phrase is the masculine pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">autou</span>); thus the possibility of omission through homoioteleuton in various witnesses is likely. Scribes might have deleted the phrase because of perceived redundancy or awkwardness in the sense: The shorter reading is smoother and more elegant, so scribes would be prone to correct the text in that direction. As far as style is concerned, repetition of key words and phrases for emphasis is not foreign to the <i>corpus Paulinum</i> (see, e.g., Rom 8:23, Eph 1:13, 2 Cor 12:7). In sum, it is easier to account for the shorter reading arising from the longer reading than vice versa, so the longer reading is more likely original, though a decision is not easy. The NA<sup>28</sup> prints the prepositional phrase in brackets indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n5100139"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100139">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The article <span class="greek">τῇ</span> (<span class="translit">tē</span>) has been translated as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n5100140"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although <span class="greek">διανοία</span> (<span class="translit">dianoia</span>) is singular in Greek, the previous plural noun <span class="greek">ἐχθρούς</span> (<span class="translit">echthrous</span>) indicates that all those from Colossae are in view here.</p></p>
<p id="n5100141"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The dative <span class="greek">ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις τοῖς πονηροῖς</span> (<span class="translit">en tois ergois tois ponērois</span>) is taken as means, indicating the avenue through which hostility in the mind is revealed and made known.</p></p>
<p id="n5100142"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100142">42</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some of the better representatives of the Alexandrian and Western groups have a passive verb here instead of the active <span class="greek">ἀποκατήλλαξεν</span> (<span class="translit">apokatēllaxen</span>, “he has reconciled”): <span class="greek">ἀποκατηλλάγητε</span> (<span class="translit">apokatēllagēte</span>) in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B, <span class="greek">ἀποκατήλλακται</span> [<i>sic</i>] (<span class="translit">apokatēllaktai</span>) in 33, and <span class="greek">ἀποκαταλλαγέντες</span> (<span class="translit">apokatallagentes</span>) in D* F G. Yet the active verb is strongly supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 048 075 0278 1175 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> lat sy. Internally, the passive creates an anacoluthon in that it looks back to the <i>accusative</i> <span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">humas</span>, “you”) of v. 21 and leaves the following <span class="greek">παραστῆσαι</span> (<span class="translit">parastēsai</span>) dangling (“you were reconciled…to present you”). The passive reading is certainly the harder reading. As such, it may well explain the rise of the others. At the same time, it is possible that the passive was produced by scribes who wanted some symmetry between the <span class="greek">ποτε</span> (<span class="translit">pote</span>, “at one time”) of v. 21 and the <span class="greek">νυνὶ δέ</span> (<span class="translit">nuni de</span>, “but now”) of v. 22: Since a passive periphrastic participle is used in v. 21, there may have been a temptation to produce a corresponding passive form in v. 22, so that the <span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span> of v. 21 functioned as subject by way of <i>constructio ad sensum</i>. Since <span class="greek">παραστῆσαι</span> occurs ten words later, it may not have been considered in this scribal modification. Further, the Western reading (<span class="greek">ἀποκαταλλαγέντες</span>) hardly seems to have arisen from <span class="greek">ἀποκατηλλάγητε</span> (contra <i>TCGNT</i> 555). As difficult as this decision is, the preferred reading is the active form because it is superior externally and seems to explain the rise of all forms of the passive readings.</p><p><b>tn</b> The direct object is omitted in the Greek text, but it is clear from context that “you” (<span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span>, <span class="translit">humas</span>) is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n5100143"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 276 s.v. <span class="greek">ἑδραῖος</span> suggests “<i>firm, steadfast</i>.” </p></p>
<p id="n5100144"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 639 s.v. <span class="greek">μετακινέω</span> suggests “<i>without shifting from the hope</i>” here.</p></p>
<p id="n5100145"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 697 s.v. <span class="greek">οἰκονομία</span> 1.b renders the term here as “<i>divine office</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100146"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 828 s.v. <span class="greek">πληρόω</span> 3. The idea here seems to be that the apostle wants to “complete the word of God” in that he wants to preach it to every person in the known world (cf. Rom 15:19). See P. T. O’Brien, <i>Colossians, Philemon</i> (WBC), 82.</p></p>
<p id="n5100147"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive noun <span class="greek">τῆς δόξης</span> (<span class="translit">tēs doxēs</span>) is an attributive genitive and has therefore been translated as “glorious riches.” </p></p>
<p id="n5100148"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100148">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “admonishing,” or “warning.” BDAG 679 s.v. <span class="greek">νουθετέω</span> states, “to counsel about avoidance or cessation of an improper course of conduct, <i>admonish, warn, instruct</i>.” After the participle <span class="greek">νουθετοῦντες</span> (<span class="translit">nouthetountes</span>, “instructing”) the words <span class="greek">πάντα ἄνθρωπον</span> (<span class="translit">panta anthrōpon</span>, “all men”) occur in the Greek text, but since the same phrase appears again after <span class="greek">διδάσκοντες</span> (<span class="translit">didaskontes</span>) it was omitted in translation to avoid redundancy in English.</p></p>
<p id="n5100149"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The two participles “instructing” (<span class="greek">νουθετοῦντες</span>, <span class="translit">nouthetountes</span>) and “teaching” (<span class="greek">διδάσκοντες</span>, <span class="translit">didaskontes</span>) are translated as participles of means (“by”) related to the finite verb “we proclaim” (<span class="greek">καταγγέλλομεν</span>, <span class="translit">katangellomen</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n5100150"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπον</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpon</span>) is twice translated as a generic (“people” and “person”) since both men and women are clearly intended in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n5100151"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100151">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Since Paul’s focus is on the present experience of the Colossians, “mature” is a better translation of <span class="greek">τέλειον</span> (<span class="translit">teleion</span>) than “perfect,” since the latter implies a future, eschatological focus.</p></p>
<p id="n5100152"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100152">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek phrase <span class="greek">εἴς ὅ</span> (<span class="translit">eis ho</span>, “toward which”) implies “movement toward a goal” and has been rendered by the English phrase “Toward this goal.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100153"><a href="file1159.xhtml#n5100153">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> The prepositional phrase <span class="greek">ἐν δυνάμει</span> (<span class="translit">en dunamei</span>) seems to be functioning adverbially, related to the participle, and has therefore been translated “powerfully.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
