<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Philippians 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Philippians<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Christian Unity and Christ’s Humility</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Therefore, if there is any encouragement in Christ, any comfort provided by love, any fellowship in the Spirit,<sup><a id="n500021" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n500021">1</a></sup> any affection or mercy,<sup><a id="n500022" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n500022">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:2</span> complete my joy and be of the same mind,<sup><a id="n500023" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n500023">3</a></sup> by having the same love, being united in spirit,<sup><a id="n500024" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n500024">4</a></sup> and having one purpose. <span class="verse">2:3</span> Instead of being motivated by selfish ambition<sup><a id="n500025" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n500025">5</a></sup> or vanity, each of you should, in humility, be moved to treat one another as more important than yourself. <span class="verse">2:4</span> Each of you should be concerned<sup><a id="n500026" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n500026">6</a></sup> not only<sup><a id="n500027" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n500027">7</a></sup> about your own interests, but about the interests of others as well.<sup><a id="n500028" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n500028">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:5</span> You should have the same attitude toward one another that Christ Jesus had,<sup><a id="n500029" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n500029">9</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> <sup><a id="n5000210" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000210">10</a></sup> who though he existed in the form of God<sup><a id="n5000211" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000211">11</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">did not regard equality with God</p>
<p class="poetry">as something to be grasped, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:7</span> but emptied himself</p>
<p class="poetry">by taking on the form of a slave,<sup><a id="n5000212" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000212">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">by looking like other men,<sup><a id="n5000213" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000213">13</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">and by sharing in human nature.<sup><a id="n5000214" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000214">14</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:8</span> He humbled himself, </p>
<p class="poetry">by becoming obedient to the point of death</p>
<p class="poetry">—even death on a cross! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:9</span> As a result God highly exalted him</p>
<p class="poetry">and gave him the name</p>
<p class="poetry">that is above every name, </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:10</span> so that at the name of Jesus</p>
<p class="poetry">every knee will bow</p>
<p class="poetry">—in heaven and on earth and under the earth—</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:11</span> and every tongue confess</p>
<p class="poetry">that Jesus Christ is Lord</p>
<p class="poetry">to the glory of God the Father. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Lights in the World</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:12</span> So then, my dear friends, just as you have always obeyed, not only in my presence but even more in my absence, continue working out your salvation with awe and reverence,<sup><a id="n5000215" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000215">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:13</span> for the one bringing forth in you both the desire and the effort—for the sake of his good pleasure—is God. <span class="verse">2:14</span> Do everything without grumbling or arguing, <span class="verse">2:15</span> so that you may be blameless and pure, children of God without blemish though you live in a crooked and perverse society, in which you shine as lights in the world<sup><a id="n5000216" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000216">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:16</span> by holding on to<sup><a id="n5000217" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000217">17</a></sup> the word of life so that on the day of Christ I will have a reason to boast that I did not run in vain nor labor in vain. <span class="verse">2:17</span> But even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad and rejoice together with all of you. <span class="verse">2:18</span> And in the same way you also should be glad and rejoice together with me. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Models for Ministry</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:19</span> Now I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, so that I too may be encouraged by hearing news about you. <span class="verse">2:20</span> For there is no one here like him who will readily demonstrate his deep concern for you.<sup><a id="n5000218" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000218">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:21</span> Others are busy with their own concerns, not those of Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">2:22</span> But you know his qualifications, that like a son working with his father, he served with me in advancing the gospel. <span class="verse">2:23</span> So I hope to send him as soon as I know more about my situation, <span class="verse">2:24</span> though I am confident in the Lord that I too will be coming to see you<sup><a id="n5000219" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000219">19</a></sup> soon. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:25</span> But for now<sup><a id="n5000220" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000220">20</a></sup> I have considered it necessary to send Epaphroditus to you. For he is my brother,<sup><a id="n5000221" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000221">21</a></sup> coworker and fellow soldier, and your messenger<sup><a id="n5000222" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000222">22</a></sup> and minister<sup><a id="n5000223" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000223">23</a></sup> to me in my need.<sup><a id="n5000224" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000224">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:26</span> Indeed, he greatly missed all of you and was distressed because you heard that he had been ill. <span class="verse">2:27</span> In fact he became so ill that he nearly died.<sup><a id="n5000225" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000225">25</a></sup> But God showed mercy to him—and not to him only, but also to me—so that I would not have grief on top of grief. <span class="verse">2:28</span> Therefore I am all the more eager to send him,<sup><a id="n5000226" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000226">26</a></sup> so that when you see him again you can rejoice<sup><a id="n5000227" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000227">27</a></sup> and I can be free from anxiety. <span class="verse">2:29</span> So welcome him in the Lord with great joy, and honor people like him, <span class="verse">2:30</span> since it was because of the work of Christ that he almost died. He risked his life so that he could make up for your inability to serve me.<sup><a id="n5000228" href="file1155_notes.xhtml#n5000228">28</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>