<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Mark 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Triumphal Entry </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:1</span> Now<sup><a id="n410111" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n410111">1</a></sup> as they approached Jerusalem, near Bethphage<sup><a id="n410113" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n410113">3</a></sup> and Bethany, at the Mount of Olives,<sup><a id="n410114" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n410114">4</a></sup> Jesus<sup><a id="n410115" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n410115">5</a></sup> sent two of his disciples <span class="verse">11:2</span> and said to them, “Go to the village ahead of you.<sup><a id="n410116" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n410116">6</a></sup> As soon as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there that has never been ridden.<sup><a id="n410117" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n410117">7</a></sup> Untie it and bring it here. <span class="verse">11:3</span> If anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord needs it<sup><a id="n410118" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n410118">8</a></sup> and will send it back here soon.’” <span class="verse">11:4</span> So<sup><a id="n410119" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n410119">9</a></sup> they went and found a colt tied at a door, outside in the street, and untied it. <span class="verse">11:5</span> Some people standing there said to them, “What are you doing, untying that colt?” <span class="verse">11:6</span> They replied as Jesus had told them, and the bystanders<sup><a id="n4101110" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101110">10</a></sup> let them go. <span class="verse">11:7</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101111" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101111">11</a></sup> they brought the colt to Jesus, threw their cloaks<sup><a id="n4101112" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101112">12</a></sup> on it, and he sat on it.<sup><a id="n4101113" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101113">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:8</span> Many spread their cloaks on the road and others spread branches they had cut in the fields. <span class="verse">11:9</span> Both those who went ahead and those who followed kept shouting, “<b><i>Hosanna!</i></b><sup><a id="n4101114" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101114">14</a></sup> <b><i>Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!</i></b><sup><a id="n4101115" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101115">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:10</span> Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David! Hosanna in the highest!” <span class="verse">11:11</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101116" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101116">16</a></sup> Jesus<sup><a id="n4101117" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101117">17</a></sup> entered Jerusalem and went to the temple. And after looking around at everything, he went out to Bethany with the twelve since it was already late. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Cursing of the Fig Tree </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:12</span> Now<sup><a id="n4101118" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101118">18</a></sup> the next day, as they went out from Bethany, he was hungry. <span class="verse">11:13</span> After noticing in the distance a fig tree with leaves, he went to see if he could find any fruit<sup><a id="n4101119" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101119">19</a></sup> on it. When he came to it he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs. <span class="verse">11:14</span> He said to it,<sup><a id="n4101120" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101120">20</a></sup> “May no one ever eat fruit from you again.” And his disciples heard it.<sup><a id="n4101121" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101121">21</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Cleansing the Temple </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:15</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101122" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101122">22</a></sup> they came to Jerusalem. Jesus<sup><a id="n4101124" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101124">24</a></sup> entered the temple area<sup><a id="n4101125" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101125">25</a></sup> and began to drive out those who were selling and buying in the temple courts.<sup><a id="n4101126" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101126">26</a></sup> He turned over the tables of the money changers and the chairs of those selling doves, <span class="verse">11:16</span> and he would not permit anyone to carry merchandise<sup><a id="n4101127" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101127">27</a></sup> through the temple courts.<sup><a id="n4101128" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101128">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:17</span> Then he began to teach<sup><a id="n4101129" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101129">29</a></sup> them and said, “Is it not written: ‘<b><i>My house will be called a house of prayer for all nations</i></b>’?<sup><a id="n4101130" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101130">30</a></sup> But you have turned it into <b><i>a den</i></b><sup><a id="n4101131" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101131">31</a></sup> <b><i>of robbers</i></b>!”<sup><a id="n4101132" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101132">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:18</span> The chief priests and the experts in the law<sup><a id="n4101133" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101133">33</a></sup> heard it and they considered how they could assassinate<sup><a id="n4101134" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101134">34</a></sup> him, for they feared him, because the whole crowd was amazed by his teaching. <span class="verse">11:19</span> When evening came, Jesus and his disciples<sup><a id="n4101135" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101135">35</a></sup> went out of the city. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Withered Fig Tree </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:20</span> In the morning as they passed by, they saw the fig tree withered from the roots. <span class="verse">11:21</span> Peter remembered and said to him, “Rabbi, look! The fig tree you cursed has withered.” <span class="verse">11:22</span> Jesus said to them, “Have faith in God. <span class="verse">11:23</span> I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4101136" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101136">36</a></sup> if someone says to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ and does not doubt in his heart but believes that what he says will happen, it will be done for him. <span class="verse">11:24</span> For this reason I tell you, whatever you pray and ask for, believe that you have received it, and it will be yours. <span class="verse">11:25</span> Whenever you stand praying, if you have anything against anyone, forgive him, so that your Father in heaven will<sup><a id="n4101137" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101137">37</a></sup> also forgive you your sins.”<sup><a id="n4101138" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101138">38</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Authority of Jesus </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:27</span> They came again to Jerusalem. While Jesus<sup><a id="n4101140" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101140">40</a></sup> was walking in the temple courts,<sup><a id="n4101141" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101141">41</a></sup> the chief priests, the experts in the law,<sup><a id="n4101142" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101142">42</a></sup> and the elders came up to him <span class="verse">11:28</span> and said, “By what authority<sup><a id="n4101143" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101143">43</a></sup> are you doing these things? Or who gave you this authority to do these things?” <span class="verse">11:29</span> Jesus said to them, “I will ask you one question. Answer me and I will tell you by what authority I do these things: <span class="verse">11:30</span> John’s baptism—was it from heaven or from people?<sup><a id="n4101144" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101144">44</a></sup> Answer me.” <span class="verse">11:31</span> They discussed with one another, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Then why did you not believe him?’ <span class="verse">11:32</span> But if we say, ‘From people—’” (they feared the crowd, for they all considered John to be truly a prophet). <span class="verse">11:33</span> So<sup><a id="n4101145" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101145">45</a></sup> they answered Jesus,<sup><a id="n4101146" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101146">46</a></sup> “We don’t know.”<sup><a id="n4101147" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101147">47</a></sup> Then Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you<sup><a id="n4101148" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101148">48</a></sup> by what authority<sup><a id="n4101149" href="file1009_notes.xhtml#n4101149">49</a></sup> I am doing these things.” </p>

</body>
</html>