<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Visit of the Wise Men</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> After Jesus was born in Bethlehem in Judea, in the time<sup><a id="n400022" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n400022">2</a></sup> of King Herod,<sup><a id="n400023" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n400023">3</a></sup> wise men<sup><a id="n400024" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n400024">4</a></sup> from the East came to Jerusalem <span class="verse">2:2</span> saying, “Where is the one who is born king of the Jews? For we saw his star when it rose<sup><a id="n400026" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n400026">6</a></sup> and have come to worship him.” <span class="verse">2:3</span> When King Herod<sup><a id="n400027" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n400027">7</a></sup> heard this he was alarmed, and all Jerusalem<sup><a id="n400028" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n400028">8</a></sup> with him. <span class="verse">2:4</span> After assembling all the chief priests and experts in the law,<sup><a id="n400029" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n400029">9</a></sup> he asked them where the Christ<sup><a id="n4000210" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000210">10</a></sup> was to be born. <span class="verse">2:5</span> “In Bethlehem of Judea,” they said, “for it is written this way by the prophet: </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">2:6</span> ‘<i><b>And you, Bethlehem,</b> in the land of Judah,</i></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>are in no way least among the rulers of Judah,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>for out of you will come a ruler who will shepherd my people Israel</b></i>.’”<sup><a id="n4000211" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000211">11</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:7</span> Then Herod<sup><a id="n4000212" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000212">12</a></sup> privately summoned the wise men and determined from them when the star had appeared. <span class="verse">2:8</span> He<sup><a id="n4000213" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000213">13</a></sup> sent them to Bethlehem and said, “Go and look carefully for the child. When you find him, inform me so that I can go and worship him as well.” <span class="verse">2:9</span> After listening to the king they left, and once again<sup><a id="n4000214" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000214">14</a></sup> the star they saw when it rose<sup><a id="n4000215" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000215">15</a></sup> led them until it stopped above the place where the child was. <span class="verse">2:10</span> When they saw the star they shouted joyfully.<sup><a id="n4000216" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000216">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:11</span> As they came into the house and saw the child with Mary his mother, they bowed down<sup><a id="n4000217" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000217">17</a></sup> and worshiped him. They opened their treasure boxes and gave him gifts of gold, frankincense,<sup><a id="n4000218" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000218">18</a></sup> and myrrh.<sup><a id="n4000219" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000219">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:12</span> After being warned in a dream not to return to Herod,<sup><a id="n4000220" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000220">20</a></sup> they went back by another route to their own country. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Escape to Egypt</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:13</span> After they had gone, an<sup><a id="n4000221" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000221">21</a></sup> angel of the Lord<sup><a id="n4000222" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000222">22</a></sup> appeared to Joseph in a dream and said, “Get up, take the child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and stay there until I tell you, for Herod<sup><a id="n4000223" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000223">23</a></sup> is going to look for the child to kill him.” <span class="verse">2:14</span> Then he got up, took the child and his mother during<sup><a id="n4000224" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000224">24</a></sup> the night, and went to Egypt. <span class="verse">2:15</span> He stayed there until Herod<sup><a id="n4000225" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000225">25</a></sup> died. In this way what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet was fulfilled: “<b><i>I called my Son out of Egypt</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4000226" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000226">26</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:16</span> When Herod<sup><a id="n4000227" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000227">27</a></sup> saw that he had been tricked by the wise men, he became enraged. He sent men<sup><a id="n4000228" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000228">28</a></sup> to kill all the children in Bethlehem and throughout the surrounding region from the age of two and under, according to the time he had learned from the wise men. <span class="verse">2:17</span> Then what was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled: </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">2:18</span> “<b><i>A voice was heard in Ramah,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>weeping and loud wailing,</i></b><sup><a id="n4000230" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000230">30</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>Rachel weeping for her children,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>and she did not want to be comforted, because they were</i></b><sup><a id="n4000231" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000231">31</a></sup> <i><b>gone</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4000232" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000232">32</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Return to Nazareth</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:19</span> After Herod<sup><a id="n4000233" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000233">33</a></sup> had died, an<sup><a id="n4000234" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000234">34</a></sup> angel of the Lord<sup><a id="n4000235" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000235">35</a></sup> appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt <span class="verse">2:20</span> saying, “Get up, take the child and his mother, and go to the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the child’s life are dead.” <span class="verse">2:21</span> So<sup><a id="n4000236" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000236">36</a></sup> he got up and took the child and his mother and returned to the land of Israel. <span class="verse">2:22</span> But when he heard that Archelaus<sup><a id="n4000237" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000237">37</a></sup> was reigning over Judea in place of his father Herod,<sup><a id="n4000238" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000238">38</a></sup> he was afraid to go there. After being warned in a dream, he went to the regions of Galilee. <span class="verse">2:23</span> He came to a town called Nazareth<sup><a id="n4000239" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000239">39</a></sup> and lived there. Then what had been spoken by the prophets was fulfilled, that Jesus<sup><a id="n4000240" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000240">40</a></sup> would be called a Nazarene.<sup><a id="n4000241" href="file971_notes.xhtml#n4000241">41</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>