<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 17</h2>
<p id="n420171"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n420171">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n420172"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n420172">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Luke 6:24-26.</p></p>
<p id="n420173"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n420173">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term refers to the heavy upper stone of a grinding mill (L&amp;N 7.70; BDAG 660 s.v. <span class="greek">μυλικός</span>). </p><p><b>sn</b> The punishment of drowning with a heavy weight attached is extremely gruesome and reflects Jesus’ views concerning those who cause others who believe in him to sin.</p></p>
<p id="n420174"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n420174">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if a millstone were tied…and he were thrown.” The conditional construction in Greek has been translated by English infinitives: “to have…and be thrown.”</p></p>
<p id="n420175"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n420175">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to stumble.” This verb, <span class="greek">σκανδαλίσῃ</span> (<span class="translit">skandalisē</span>), has the same root as the noun <span class="greek">σκάνδαλον</span> (<span class="translit">skandalon</span>) in 17:1, translated “stumbling blocks”; this wordplay is difficult to reproduce in English. It is possible that the primary cause of offense here would be leading disciples (“little ones”) astray in a similar fashion.</p></p>
<p id="n420176"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n420176">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> It is difficult to know if this looks back or forward or both. The warning suggests it looks back. For this verb, see Luke 8:18; 12:1, 15; 20:46; 21:8, 34. The present imperative reflects an ongoing spirit of watchfulness.</p></p>
<p id="n420177"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n420177">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Both the “if” clause in this verse and the “if” clause in v. 4 are third class conditions in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n420178"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n420178">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the term “brother” means “fellow believer” or “fellow Christian” (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 2.a, <i>contra</i> BDAG 19 s.v. 2.c), but with a familial connotation. It refers equally to men, women, or children. However, because of the familial connotations, “brother” has been retained in the translation here in preference to the more generic “fellow believer” (“fellow Christian” would be anachronistic in this context).</p></p>
<p id="n420179"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n420179">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And if.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201710"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201710">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>You must forgive him</i>. Forgiveness is to be readily given and not withheld. In a community that is to have restored relationships, grudges are not beneficial.</p></p>
<p id="n4201711"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201711">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201712"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201712">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> The request of the apostles, “<i>Increase our faith</i>,” is not a request for a gift of faith, but a request to increase the depth of their faith.</p></p>
<p id="n4201713"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201713">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201714"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201714">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201715"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201715">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a mixed condition, with <span class="greek">ἄν</span> (<span class="translit">an</span>) in the apodosis.</p></p>
<p id="n4201716"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201716">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “faith as,” “faith like.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201717"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201717">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>black mulberry tree</i> is a deciduous fruit tree that grows about 20 ft (6 m) tall and has black juicy berries. This tree has an extensive root system, so to pull it up would be a major operation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201718"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201718">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The passives here (<span class="greek">ἐκριζώθητι</span> and <span class="greek">φυτεύθητι</span>, <span class="translit">ekrizōthēti</span> and <span class="translit">phuteuthēti</span>) are probably a circumlocution for God performing the action (the so-called divine passive, see <i>ExSyn</i> 437-38). The issue is not the amount of faith (which in the example is only very tiny), but its presence, which can accomplish impossible things. To cause a tree to be uprooted and planted in the sea is impossible. The expression is a rhetorical idiom. It is like saying a camel can go through the eye of a needle (Luke 18:25).</p></p>
<p id="n4201719"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201719">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb is aorist, though it looks at a future event, another rhetorical touch to communicate certainty of the effect of faith.</p></p>
<p id="n4201720"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Who among you, having a slave…would say to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201721"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201721">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 7:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4201722"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201722">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and recline at table,” as 1st century middle eastern meals were not eaten while sitting at a table, but while reclining on one’s side on the floor with the head closest to the low table and the feet farthest away. See BDAG 70 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναπίπτω</span> 1.</p></p>
<p id="n4201723"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201723">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The question includes a Greek particle, <span class="greek">οὐχί</span> (<span class="translit">ouchi</span>), that expects a positive reply. The slave is expected to prepare a meal before eating himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4201724"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201724">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201725"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201725">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and gird yourself” (with an apron or towel, in preparation for service).</p></p>
<p id="n4201726"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201726">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 423 s.v. <span class="greek">ἕως</span> 2.b, “to denote contemporaneousness <i>as long as, while</i>…w. subjunctive…Lk 17:8.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201727"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201727">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “after these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201728"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201728">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “did what was commanded.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201729"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201729">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek construction anticipates a negative reply which is indicated in the translation by the ‘tag’ at the end, “will he?” Thanks are not required.</p></p>
<p id="n4201730"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201730">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Some translations describe the slaves as “worthless” (NRSV) or “unworthy” (NASB, NIV) but that is not Jesus’ point. These disciples have not done anything deserving special commendation or praise (L&amp;N 33.361), but only what would normally be expected of a slave in such a situation (thus the translation “we have only done what was our duty”).</p></p>
<p id="n4201731"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201731">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “we have only done what we were supposed to do.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201732"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201732">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that on.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201733"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201733">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is another travel note about Jesus going to <i>Jerusalem</i> in Luke 9:51-19:48, the so-called “Jerusalem journey” section of Luke’s Gospel. It is not a straight line journey, because to travel along the Galilean and Samaritan border is to go east or west, not south to Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n4201734"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201734">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201735"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201735">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was traveling about.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201736"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201736">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201737"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201737">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">εἰσερχομένου</span> (<span class="translit">eiserchomenou</span>) is taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4201738"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201738">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>ten men with leprosy</i> would have been unable to approach Jesus (Lev 13:45-46; Num 5:2-3). A leper was totally ostracized from society until he was declared cured (Lev 13:45-46). For more on the condition, see the note on <i>lepers</i> in Luke 4:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4201739"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201739">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “leprosy, who.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun was replaced with a personal pronoun and a new sentence started at this point in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201740"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201740">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>Have mercy on us</i>” is a request to heal them (Luke 18:38-39; 16:24; Matt 9:27; 15:22; 17:15; 20:31-32; Mark 10:47-49).</p></p>
<p id="n4201741"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201741">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <span class="greek">Καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201742"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201742">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">πορευθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">poreuthentes</span>) is a good example of an adverbial participle of attendant circumstance. As such, it picks up the force of an imperative from the verb to which it is related (<i>ExSyn</i> 640-45).</p></p>
<p id="n4201743"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201743">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> These are the instructions of what to do with a healing (Lev 13:19; 14:1-11; Luke 5:14).</p></p>
<p id="n4201744"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201744">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that as.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201745"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201745">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “glorifying God.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201746"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201746">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201747"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201747">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he fell on his face” (an idiom for complete prostration).</p></p>
<p id="n4201748"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201748">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>And thanked him</i>. This action recognized God’s healing work through Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4201749"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201749">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the introduction of a parenthetical comment. </p></p>
<p id="n4201750"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201750">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author. The comment that the man was <i>a Samaritan</i> means that to most Jews of Jesus’ day he would have been despised as a half-breed and a heretic. The note adds a touch of irony to the account (v. 18).</p></p>
<p id="n4201751"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201751">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201752"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201752">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus answering said”; this is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201753"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201753">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek construction used here (<span class="greek">οὐχί</span>, <span class="translit">ouchi</span>) expects a positive reply.</p></p>
<p id="n4201754"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201754">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “other” is implied in the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201755"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201755">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ point in calling the man a <i>foreigner</i> is that none of the other nine, who were presumably Israelites, responded with gratitude. Only the “outsiders” were listening and responding.</p></p>
<p id="n4201756"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201756">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201757"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201757">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to him”; the referent has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201758"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201758">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has delivered you”; <i>Grk</i> “has saved you.” The remark about faith suggests the benefit of trusting in Jesus’ ability to deliver. Apparently the Samaritan benefited from the healing in a way the other nine did not.</p></p>
<p id="n4201759"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201759">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “at one point” are supplied to indicate that the following incident is not necessarily in chronological sequence with the preceding event.</p></p>
<p id="n4201760"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201760">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n4201761"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201761">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having been asked by the Pharisees.” The passive construction has been translated as an active one in keeping with contemporary English style, and the direct object, Jesus, has been supplied from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201762"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201762">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n4201763"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201763">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is not coming in a way that it can be closely watched” (L&amp;N 24.48). Although there are differing interpretations of what this means, it probably refers to the cosmic signs often associated with the kingdom’s coming in the Jewish view (<i>1 En</i>. 91, 93; <i>2 Bar</i>. 53–74). See D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> (BECNT), 2:1412-14, also H. Riesenfeld, <i>TDNT</i> 8:150.</p></p>
<p id="n4201764"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201764">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a present tense in the Greek text. In contrast to waiting and looking for the kingdom, it is now available.</p></p>
<p id="n4201765"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201765">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a far better translation than “in you.” Jesus would never tell the hostile Pharisees that the kingdom was inside them. The reference is to Jesus present in their midst. He brings the kingdom. Another possible translation would be “in your grasp.” For further discussion and options, see D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> (BECNT), 2:1414-19.</p></p>
<p id="n4201766"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201766">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201767"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201767">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a reference to the <i>days</i> of the full manifestation of Jesus’ power in a fully established kingdom. The reference to “days” instead of “day” is unusual, appearing only here and in v. 26, but it may be motivated merely by parallelism with the “days” of Noah there and the “days of Lot” in v. 28.</p></p>
<p id="n4201768"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201768">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they will say.” The plural in Greek is indefinite, referring to people in general. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201769"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201769">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “he is” here and in the following clause are understood and have been supplied from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201770"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201770">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Do not go out or chase after them</i>. There will be no need to search for the Son of Man at his coming, though many will falsely claim its arrival.</p></p>
<p id="n4201771"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201771">71</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Son of Man’s coming in power will be sudden and obvious like <i>lightning</i>. No one will need to point it out.</p></p>
<p id="n4201772"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201772">72</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some very significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> B D it sa) lack the words <span class="greek">ἐν τῇ ἡμέρα αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">en tē hēmera autou</span>, “in his day”), but the words are included in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A L W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy bo. On the one hand, the shorter reading is impressive because it has some of the best Alexandrian and Western witnesses in support; on the other hand, the expression <span class="greek">ἐν τῇ ἡμέρα αὐτοῦ</span> is unusual (found nowhere else in the NT), and may be considered the harder reading. A decision is difficult, but it is probably best to retain the words. NA<sup>28</sup> rightly has the words in brackets, expressing doubt as to their authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201773"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201773">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Son of Man’s suffering and rejection <i>by this generation</i> is another “it is necessary” type of event in God’s plan (Luke 4:43; 24:7, 26, 44) and the fifth passion prediction in Luke’s account (9:22, 44; 12:50; 13:32-33; for the last, see 18:32-33).</p></p>
<p id="n4201774"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201774">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201775"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201775">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “as it happened.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201776"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201776">76</a> <p><b>sn</b> Like the <i>days of Noah</i>, the time of the flood in Gen 6:5-8:22, the judgment will come as a surprise as people live their day to day lives.</p></p>
<p id="n4201777"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201777">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They.” The plural in Greek is indefinite, referring to people in general.</p></p>
<p id="n4201778"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201778">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> These verbs (“eating…drinking…marrying…being given in marriage”) are all progressive imperfects, describing action in progress at that time.</p></p>
<p id="n4201779"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201779">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201780"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201780">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> Like that flood <i>came and destroyed them all</i>, the coming judgment associated with the Son of Man will condemn many.</p></p>
<p id="n4201781"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201781">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “as it happened.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201782"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201782">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they.” The plural in Greek is indefinite, referring to people in general.</p></p>
<p id="n4201784"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201784">84</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>And destroyed them all</i>. The coming of the Son of Man will be like the judgment on Sodom, one of the most immoral places of the OT (Gen 19:16-17; Deut 32:32-33; Isa 1:10).</p></p>
<p id="n4201785"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201785">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> Most of the roofs in the NT were flat roofs made of pounded dirt, sometimes mixed with lime or stones, supported by heavy wooden beams. They generally had an easy means of access, either a sturdy wooden ladder or stone stairway, sometimes on the outside of the house.</p></p>
<p id="n4201786"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201786">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> The swiftness and devastation of the judgment will require a swift escape. There is no time to <i>come down</i> from one’s roof and pick up anything from inside one’s home.</p></p>
<p id="n4201787"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201787">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Gen 19:26. The warning about <i>Lot’s wife</i> is not to look back and long to be where one used to be. The world is being judged, and the person who delays or turns back will be destroyed.</p></p>
<p id="n4201788"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201788">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “tries to preserve”; <i>Grk</i> “seeks to gain.” </p></p>
<p id="n4201789"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201789">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “soul.” See the discussion of this Greek term in the note on “life” in Luke 9:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4201790"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201790">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek word translated <i>life</i> can refer to both earthly, physical life and inner, transcendent life (one’s “soul”). In the context, if a person is not willing to suffer the world’s rejection and persecution in order to follow Jesus but instead seeks to retain his physical life, then that person will <i>lose</i> both physical life and inner, transcendent life (at the judgment). On the other hand, the one who willingly gives up earthly, physical life to follow Jesus (“loses his life”) will ultimately <i>preserve</i> one’s “soul” (note that the parallel in John’s Gospel speaks of “guarding one’s ‘soul’ for eternal life” (John 12:25).</p></p>
<p id="n4201791"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201791">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is debate among commentators and scholars over the phrase <i>one will be taken and the other left</i> about whether one is taken for judgment or for salvation. If the imagery is patterned after the rescue of Noah from the flood and Lot from Sodom, as some suggest, the ones taken are the saved (as Noah and Lot were) and those left behind are judged. The imagery, however, is not directly tied to the identification of the two groups. Its primary purpose in context is to picture the sudden, surprising separation of the righteous and the judged (i.e., condemned) at the return of the Son of Man.</p></p>
<p id="n4201792"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201792">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at the same place.” According to L&amp;N 46.16, this refers to a hand mill normally operated by two women.</p></p>
<p id="n4201793"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201793">93</a> <p><b>tc</b> Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D ƒ<sup>13</sup> [579] 700 <i>al</i> lat sy) add (with several variations among these witnesses) <b>17:36</b> “There will be two in the field; one will be taken and the other left.” It is not well enough attested to be original. Further, it is an assimilation to the parallel in Matt 24:40, which marks the addition as secondary. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n4201794"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201794">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201795"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201795">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the disciples, v. 22) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201796"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201796">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, they said to him.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201797"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201797">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> The question “<i>Where, Lord?</i>” means, “Where will the judgment take place?”</p></p>
<p id="n4201798"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201798">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “corpse.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201799"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n4201799">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> The same Greek term can refer to “eagles” or “vultures” (L&amp;N 4.42; BDAG 22 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀετός</span>), but in this context it must mean vultures, because the gruesome image is one of dead bodies being consumed by scavengers. </p><p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ answer is that when the judgment comes, the scenes of death will be obvious and so will the location of the judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n42017100"><a href="file1032.xhtml#n42017100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will be gathered.” The passive construction has been translated as an active one in English.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
