<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 16</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 16</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Personal Greetings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:1</span> Now I commend to you our sister Phoebe, who is a servant<sup><a id="n450161" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n450161">1</a></sup> of the church in Cenchrea, <span class="verse">16:2</span> so that you may welcome her in the Lord in a way worthy of the saints and provide her with whatever help she may need from you, for she has been a great help to many, including me. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:3</span> Greet Prisca and Aquila,<sup><a id="n450162" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n450162">2</a></sup> my fellow workers in Christ Jesus, <span class="verse">16:4</span> who risked their own necks for my life. Not only I, but all the churches of the Gentiles are grateful to them. <span class="verse">16:5</span> Also greet the church in their house. Greet my dear friend Epenetus,<sup><a id="n450163" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n450163">3</a></sup> who was the first convert<sup><a id="n450164" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n450164">4</a></sup> to Christ in the province of Asia.<sup><a id="n450165" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n450165">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">16:6</span> Greet Mary, who has worked very hard for you. <span class="verse">16:7</span> Greet Andronicus and Junia,<sup><a id="n450166" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n450166">6</a></sup> my compatriots<sup><a id="n450167" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n450167">7</a></sup> and my fellow prisoners. They are well known<sup><a id="n450168" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n450168">8</a></sup> to the apostles,<sup><a id="n450169" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n450169">9</a></sup> and they were in Christ before me. <span class="verse">16:8</span> Greet Ampliatus, my dear friend in the Lord. <span class="verse">16:9</span> Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and my good friend Stachys. <span class="verse">16:10</span> Greet Apelles, who is approved in Christ. Greet those who belong to the household of Aristobulus. <span class="verse">16:11</span> Greet Herodion, my compatriot.<sup><a id="n4501610" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501610">10</a></sup> Greet those in the household of Narcissus who are in the Lord. <span class="verse">16:12</span> Greet Tryphena<sup><a id="n4501611" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501611">11</a></sup> and Tryphosa, laborers in the Lord. Greet my dear friend<sup><a id="n4501612" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501612">12</a></sup> Persis, who has worked hard in the Lord. <span class="verse">16:13</span> Greet Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his mother who was also a mother to me.<sup><a id="n4501613" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501613">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">16:14</span> Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers and sisters<sup><a id="n4501614" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501614">14</a></sup> with them. <span class="verse">16:15</span> Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the believers<sup><a id="n4501615" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501615">15</a></sup> who are with them. <span class="verse">16:16</span> Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ greet you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:17</span> Now I urge you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n4501616" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501616">16</a></sup> to watch out for those who create dissensions and obstacles contrary to the teaching that you learned. Avoid them! <span class="verse">16:18</span> For these are the kind who do not serve our Lord Christ, but their own appetites. By their smooth talk and flattery they deceive the minds<sup><a id="n4501617" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501617">17</a></sup> of the naive. <span class="verse">16:19</span> Your obedience is known to all and thus I rejoice over you. But I want you to be wise in what is good and innocent in what is evil. <span class="verse">16:20</span> The God of peace will quickly crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:21</span> Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you; so do Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my compatriots.<sup><a id="n4501618" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501618">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">16:22</span> I, Tertius, who am writing this letter, greet you in the Lord. <span class="verse">16:23</span> Gaius, who is host to me and to the whole church, greets you. Erastus the city treasurer and our brother Quartus greet you.<sup><a id="n4501619" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501619">19</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:25</span> <sup><a id="n4501620" href="file1107_notes.xhtml#n4501620">20</a></sup> Now to him who is able to strengthen you according to my gospel and the proclamation of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery that had been kept secret for long ages, <span class="verse">16:26</span> but now is disclosed, and through the prophetic scriptures has been made known to all the nations, according to the command of the eternal God, to bring about the obedience of faith— <span class="verse">16:27</span> to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, be glory forever! Amen.</p>

</body>
</html>