<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Peter 4</h2>
<p id="n600041"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n600041">1</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A P 5 33 81 436 442 1175 1611 1852 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) add <span class="greek">ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">huper hēmōn</span>, “for us”); others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* 69 1505 sy<sup>p</sup>) add <span class="greek">ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">huper humōn</span>, “for you”), the first hand of <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> also has <span class="greek">ἀποθανόντος</span> (<span class="translit">apothanontos</span>, “since he died”) instead of <span class="greek">παθόντος</span> (<span class="translit">pathontos</span>, “since he suffered”). But the reading without <span class="greek">ὑπὲρ ἡ</span>/<span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> best explains the rise of the other readings, for not only is there confusion as to which pronoun belongs here, but the longer readings, being clarifications, are evidently scribally motivated. The shortest reading is found in significant and early witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> B C <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 323 1243 1739 sa) and is strongly preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n600042"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n600042">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Has finished with sin</i>. The last sentence in v. 1 may refer to Christ as the one who suffered in the flesh (cf. 2:21, 23; 3:18; 4:1a) and the latter part would then mean, “he has finished dealing with sin.” But it is more likely that it refers to the Christian who suffers unjustly (cf. 2:19-20; 3:14, 17). This shows that he has made a break with sin as vs. 2 describes.</p></p>
<p id="n600043"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n600043">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verse may give the purpose or result of their “arming” themselves as called for in v. 1b and then the translation would be: “so that you may spend the rest of your time…” But it is better to take it as explanatory of the last phrase in v. 1: what it means to be finished with sin.</p></p>
<p id="n600044"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n600044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Gentiles,” used here of those who are not God’s people.</p></p>
<p id="n600045"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n600045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to accomplish the desire of the Gentiles.”</p></p>
<p id="n600046"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n600046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having gone along,” referring to the readers’ behavior in time past.</p></p>
<p id="n600047"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n600047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to BDAG 857 s.v. <span class="greek">πότος</span> the term refers to a social gathering at which wine is served, hence “drinking parties” (cf. TEV, NASB). However, the collocation with the other terms in v. 4 suggests something less sophisticated and more along the lines of wild and frenzied drinking bouts.</p></p>
<p id="n600048"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n600048">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek words here all occur in the plural to describe their common practice in the past.</p></p>
<p id="n600049"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n600049">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in/by which,” referring to the change of behavior described in v. 3. The unbelievers are astonished by the readers’ moral transformation. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000410"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “are surprised, are taken aback.” The same verb occurs in 4:12.</p></p>
<p id="n6000411"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “blaspheming,” giving the result of their astonishment. Here the target of their “blasphemy/vilification” is not God but the Christian.</p></p>
<p id="n6000412"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “give an account to.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000413"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one”; the referent (Jesus Christ) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6000414"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “since for this purpose the gospel was preached even to the dead,” referring to the purpose described in the clause to follow in v. 6b.</p></p>
<p id="n6000415"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000415">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> In context the phrase <i>those who are dead</i> refers to those now dead who had accepted the gospel while they were still living and had suffered persecution for their faith. Though they “suffered judgment” in this earthly life (i.e., they died, in the midst of physical abuse from the ungodly), they will enjoy life from God in the spiritual, heavenly realm because of the gospel (v. 6b). It clearly does not assume a second chance for conversion offered to unbelievers who had died; why would Peter urge people to suffer in this life for the sake of the gospel if he believed that mercy would be extended to all the dead in the hereafter (cf. 2:7-8; 4:1-5, 12-19)? </p></p>
<p id="n6000416"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that they may be judged…but may live.” Greek emphasizes the contrast between these two clauses more than can be easily expressed in English. </p></p>
<p id="n6000417"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in their earthly lives,” since “flesh” here denotes the physical, earthly life. The phrase “in the flesh” is retained to preserve the links with 3:18 and 4:1 which use the same wording. </p></p>
<p id="n6000418"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to men.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000419"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in spirit,” referring to the heavenly, eternal realm of existence (cf. 3:18). </p></p>
<p id="n6000420"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to God.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000421"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for prayers.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000422"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The primary verb of v. 8 is a participle (“having”) but it continues the sense of command from v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n6000423"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “constant.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000424"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000424">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> The statement of v. 8b, <i>love covers a multitude of sins</i>, is proverbial: It is quoted from Prov 10:12 (cf. Jas 5:20). It speaks of the forbearance that comes with love: Christian love is patient and forgiving toward the offenses of a fellow Christian (Matt 18:21-22; 1 Cor 13:4-7).</p></p>
<p id="n6000425"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is no main verb in this verse (“showing hospitality” translates the adjective <span class="greek">φιλόξενοι</span> [<span class="translit">philoxenoi</span>]), but it continues the sense of command from v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n6000426"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “serving it to one another.” The primary verb is a participle but it continues the sense of command from v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n6000427"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if anyone speaks—as God’s words.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000428"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000428">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “oracles.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000429"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000429">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if anyone serves—with strength…”</p></p>
<p id="n6000430"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is/are.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000431"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “do not be surprised, taken aback.” The same verb occurs in 4:4.</p></p>
<p id="n6000432"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000432">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at the burning among you, occurring to you for testing.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000433"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000433">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the revelation of his glory.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000434"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000434">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb “be glad” is used also in 1:6 and 1:8. The verbs of v. 13b are used together in Matt 5:12 and Rev 19:7.</p></p>
<p id="n6000435"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000435">35</a> <p><b>tc</b> Many <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, some of them significant and early ([<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>] A P 33 81 323 945 1241 1739 <i>pm</i> bo), add <span class="greek">καὶ δυνάμεως</span> (<span class="translit">kai dunameōs</span>; “and of power”) here. The shorter reading is supported by <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> B K L <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 049 <i>pm</i>). Although the evidence is evenly divided, the longer reading looks to be an explanatory or liturgical expansion on the text and for this reason should be considered secondary.</p></p>
<p id="n6000436"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000436">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Spirit of glory and of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000437"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000437">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation taken from Isa 11:2.</p></p>
<p id="n6000438"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000438">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> The meaning of the Greek word used here is uncertain. It may mean “spy, informer,” “revolutionary,” or “defrauder, embezzler.” But the most likely meaning is “busybody, one who meddles in the affairs of others, troublesome meddler.” The translation given in the text is intended to suggest this general idea.</p></p>
<p id="n6000439"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000439">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb is implied by the context but not expressed; <i>Grk</i> “but if as a Christian.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000440"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000440">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> These are third person imperatives in Greek (“if [one of you suffers] as a Christian, let him not be ashamed…let him glorify”), but have been translated as second person verbs since this is smoother English idiom.</p></p>
<p id="n6000441"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000441">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in this name.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000442"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000442">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to begin from the house.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000443"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000443">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the end.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000444"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000444">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “where will he appear.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000445"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000445">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> The personal references in v. 18 are generic singulars, but they have been changed to the plural in English to maintain consistency with the plurals of v. 17.</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Prov 11:31 (LXX).</p></p>
<p id="n6000446"><a href="file1215.xhtml#n6000446">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in doing good.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
