<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 13</h2>
<p id="n440131"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n440131">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Antioch</i> was a city in Syria (not Antioch in Pisidia).</p></p>
<p id="n440132"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n440132">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Simeon</i> may well have been from North Africa, since the Latin loanword <i>Niger</i> refers to someone as “dark-complexioned.”</p></p>
<p id="n440133"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n440133">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Cyrenian</i> refers to a native of the city of Cyrene, on the coast of northern Africa west of Egypt.</p></p>
<p id="n440134"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n440134">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Herod</i> is generally taken as a reference to Herod Antipas, who governed Galilee from 4 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> to <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 39, who had John the Baptist beheaded, and who is mentioned a number of times in the gospels.</p></p>
<p id="n440135"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n440135">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the governor.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A <i>tetrarch</i> was a ruler with rank and authority lower than a king, who ruled only with the approval of the Roman authorities. This was roughly equivalent to being governor of a region. Several times in the NT, Herod tetrarch of Galilee is called a king (Matt 14:9, Mark 6:14-29), reflecting popular usage.</p></p>
<p id="n440136"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n440136">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “(a foster brother of Herod the tetrarch).” The meaning “close friend from childhood” is given by L&amp;N 34.15, but the word can also mean “foster brother” (L&amp;N 10.51). BDAG 976 s.v. <span class="greek">σύντροφας</span> states, “pert. to being brought up with someone, either as a foster-brother or as a companion/friend,” which covers both alternatives. Context does not given enough information to be certain which is the case here, although many modern translations prefer the meaning “close friend from childhood.”</p></p>
<p id="n440137"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n440137">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term is frequently used in the LXX of the service performed by priests and Levites in the tabernacle (Exod 28:35, 43; 29:30; 30:20; 35:19; 39:26; Num 1:50; 3:6, 31) and the temple (2 Chr 31:2; 35:3; Joel 1:9, 13; 2:17, and many more examples). According to BDAG 591 s.v. <span class="greek">λειτουργέω</span> 1.b it is used “of other expression of religious devotion.” Since the previous verse described the prophets and teachers in the church at Antioch, it is probable that the term here describes two of them (Barnabas and Saul) as they were serving in that capacity. Since they were not in Jerusalem where the temple was located, general religious service is referred to here.</p></p>
<p id="n440138"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n440138">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Appoint.”</p></p>
<p id="n440139"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n440139">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The three aorist participles <span class="greek">νηστεύσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">nēsteusantes</span>),<span class="greek"> προσευξάμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">proseuxamenoi</span>), and <span class="greek">ἐπιθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">epithentes</span>) are translated as temporal participles. Although they could indicate contemporaneous time when used with an aorist main verb, logically here they are antecedent. On fasting and prayer, see Matt 6:5, 16; Luke 2:37; 5:33; Acts 14:23.</p></p>
<p id="n4401310"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Normally English style, which uses a coordinating conjunction between only the last two elements of a series of three or more, would call for omission of “and” here. However, since the terms “fasting and prayer” are something of a unit, often linked together, the conjunction has been retained here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401311"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401311">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> The placing of <i>hands</i> on Barnabas and Saul (traditionally known as “the laying on of hands”) refers to an act picturing the commission of God and the church for the task at hand.</p></p>
<p id="n4401312"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referents (Barnabas and Saul) have been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401313"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401313">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Seleucia</i> was the port city of Antioch in Syria.</p></p>
<p id="n4401314"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401314">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cyprus</i> was a large island in the Mediterranean off the south coast of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4401315"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401316"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">γενόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">genomenoi</span>) is taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4401317"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401317">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Salamis</i> was a city on the southeastern coast of the island of Cyprus. This was a commercial center and a center of Judaism.</p></p>
<p id="n4401318"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">κατήγγελλον</span> (<span class="translit">katēngellon</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4401319"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401319">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4401320"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401320">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John</i> refers here to John Mark (see Acts 12:25).</p></p>
<p id="n4401321"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word <span class="greek">ὑπηρέτης</span> (<span class="translit">hupēretēs</span>) usually has the meaning “servant,” but it is doubtful John Mark fulfilled that capacity for Barnabas and Saul. He was more likely an apprentice or assistant to them.</p><p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4401322"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “had passed through,” “had traveled through.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401323"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401323">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Paphos</i>. A city on the southwestern coast of the island of Cyprus. It was the seat of the Roman proconsul.</p></p>
<p id="n4401324"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401324">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Named Bar-Jesus</i>. “Jesus” is the Latin form of the name “Joshua.” The Aramaic “<i>bar</i>” means “son of,” so this man was surnamed “son of Joshua.” The scene depicts the conflict between Judaism and the emerging new faith at a cosmic level, much like the Simon Magus incident in Acts 8:9-24. Paul’s ministry looks like Philip’s and Peter’s here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401325"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401325">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The proconsul</i> was the Roman official who ruled over a province traditionally under the control of the Roman senate.</p></p>
<p id="n4401326"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “This one”; the referent (the proconsul) is specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401327"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “summoning Barnabas and Saul, wanted to hear.” The participle <span class="greek">προσκαλεσάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">proskalesamenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401328"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401328">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The proconsul…wanted to hear the word of God</i>. This description of Sergius Paulus portrays him as a sensitive, secular Gentile leader.</p></p>
<p id="n4401329"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the debate over what the name “Elymas” means, see BDAG 320 s.v. <span class="greek">᾿Ελύμας</span>. The magician’s behavior is more directly opposed to the faith than Simon Magus’ was.</p></p>
<p id="n4401330"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401330">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> A parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4401331"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401331">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The proconsul</i> was the Roman official who ruled over a province traditionally under the control of the Roman senate.</p></p>
<p id="n4401332"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401332">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> A parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4401333"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401333">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> This qualifying clause in the narrative indicates who represented God in the dispute.</p></p>
<p id="n4401334"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401334">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “gazed intently.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401335"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401335">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “unscrupulousness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401336"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401336">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>“You who…paths of the Lord?”</i> This rebuke is like ones from the OT prophets: Jer 5:27; Gen 32:11; Prov 10:7; Hos 14:9. Five separate remarks indicate the magician’s failings. The closing rhetorical question of v. 10 (“<i>will you not stop…?</i>”) shows how opposed he is to the way of God.</p></p>
<p id="n4401337"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401337">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And now.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401338"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401338">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “upon,” but in a negative sense.</p></p>
<p id="n4401339"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401339">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term translated <i>mistiness</i> here appears in the writings of the physician Galen as a medical technical description of a person who is blind. The picture of judgment to darkness is symbolic as well. Whatever power Elymas had, it represented darkness. Magic will again be an issue in Acts 19:18-19. This judgment is like that of Ananias and his wife in Acts 5:1-11.</p></p>
<p id="n4401340"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401340">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fell on.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401341"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401341">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The noun <span class="greek">χειραγωγός</span> (<span class="translit">cheiragōgos</span>) is plural, so “people” is used rather than singular “someone.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401342"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401342">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>proconsul</i> in v. 8.</p></p>
<p id="n4401343"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401343">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He believed</i>. The faith of the proconsul in the face of Jewish opposition is a theme of the rest of Acts. Paul has indeed become “a light to the Gentiles” (Acts 13:47).</p></p>
<p id="n4401344"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401344">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “greatly astounded” for <span class="greek">ἐκπλησσόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">ekplēssomenos</span>) is given by L&amp;N 25.219.</p></p>
<p id="n4401345"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401345">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of,” but this could give the impression the Lord himself had done the teaching (a subjective genitive) when actually the Lord was the object of the teaching (an objective genitive).</p></p>
<p id="n4401346"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401346">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401347"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401347">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Paphos</i> was a city on the southwestern coast of the island of Cyprus. See Acts 13:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4401348"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401348">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Perga</i> was a city in Pamphylia near the southern coast of Asia Minor. The journey from Paphos to Perga is about 105 mi (175 km).</p></p>
<p id="n4401349"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401349">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Pamphylia</i> was a province in the southern part of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4401350"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401350">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, John Mark.</p></p>
<p id="n4401351"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401351">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Returned to Jerusalem</i>. John Mark had originally accompanied them from Jerusalem (see Acts 12:25). John Mark’s decision to leave became an issue later for Barnabas and Paul (Acts 15:36-39).</p></p>
<p id="n4401352"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401352">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Passing by.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401353"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401353">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Perga</i> was a city in Pamphylia near the southern coast of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4401354"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401354">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “at Antioch in Pisidia.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Pisidian Antioch</i> was a city in Pisidia about 100 mi (160 km) north of Perga. It was both a Roman colony and the seat of military and civil authority in S. Galatia. One had to trek over the Taurus Mountains to get there, since the city was 3,600 ft (1,100 m) above sea level.</p></p>
<p id="n4401355"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401355">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going into the synagogue they sat down.” The participle <span class="greek">εἰσελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">eiselthontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401356"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401356">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4401357"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401357">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>After the reading from the law and the prophets</i>. In the 1st century Jewish synagogue, it was customary after the reading of the Torah (<i>law</i>) and <i>prophets</i> for men to give exhortation from the scriptures.</p></p>
<p id="n4401358"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401358">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Normally <span class="greek">ἀρχισυνάγωγος</span> (<span class="translit">archisunagōgos</span>) refers to the “<i>president of a synagogue</i>” (so BDAG 139 s.v. and L&amp;N 53.93). Since the term is plural here, however, and it would sound strange to the English reader to speak of “the presidents of the synagogue,” the alternative translation “leaders” is used. “Rulers” would also be acceptable, but does not convey quite the same idea.</p></p>
<p id="n4401359"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401359">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sent to them”; the word “message” is an understood direct object. Direct objects in Greek were often omitted when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4401360"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401360">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Men brothers,” but this is both awkward and unnecessary in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4401361"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401361">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “word.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401362"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401362">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “encouragement.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401363"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401363">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “give it.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401364"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401364">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> This participle, <span class="greek">ἀναστάς</span> (<span class="translit">anastas</span>), and the following one, <span class="greek">κατασείσας</span> (<span class="translit">kataseisas</span>), are both translated as adverbial participles of attendant circumstance.</p></p>
<p id="n4401365"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401365">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “motioned.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401366"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401366">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Israelite men,” although this is less natural English. The Greek term here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which only exceptionally is used in a generic sense of both males and females. In this context involving an address to a synagogue gathering, it is conceivable that this is a generic usage, although it can also be argued that Paul’s remarks were addressed primarily to the men present, even if women were there.</p></p>
<p id="n4401367"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401367">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and those who fear God,” but this is practically a technical term for the category called <i>God-fearers</i>, Gentiles who worshiped the God of Israel and in many cases kept the Mosaic law, but did not take the final step of circumcision necessary to become a proselyte to Judaism. See further K. G. Kuhn, <i>TDNT</i> 6:732-34, 743-44.</p></p>
<p id="n4401368"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401368">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “people of Israel.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401369"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401369">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Note how Paul identifies with his audience by referring to <i>our ancestors</i>. He speaks as a Jew. God’s design in history is the theme of the speech. The speech is like Stephen’s, only here the focus is on a promised Son of David.</p></p>
<p id="n4401370"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401370">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, in both numbers and in power. The implication of greatness in both numbers and in power is found in BDAG 1046 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑψόω</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4401371"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401371">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “as resident aliens.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401372"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401372">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “land.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401373"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401373">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here <i>uplifted arm</i> is a metaphor for God’s power by which he delivered the Israelites from Egypt. See Exod 6:1, 6; 32:11; Deut 3:24; 4:34; Ps 136:11-12.</p></p>
<p id="n4401374"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401374">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And for.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401375"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401375">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> For this verb, see BDAG 1017 s.v. <span class="greek">τροποφορέω</span> (cf. also Deut 1:31; Exod 16:35; Num 14:34).</p></p>
<p id="n4401376"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401376">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401377"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401377">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401378"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401378">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">καθελών</span> (<span class="translit">kathelōn</span>) is taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4401379"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401379">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Seven nations</i>. See Deut 7:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4401380"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401380">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he gave their land as an inheritance.” The words “his people” are supplied to complete an ellipsis specifying the recipients of the land.</p></p>
<p id="n4401381"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401381">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “all this took” are not in the Greek text, but are supplied to make a complete statement in English. There is debate over where this period of 450 years fits and what it includes: (1) It could include the years in Egypt, the conquest of Canaan, and the distribution of the land; (2) some connect it with the following period of the judges. This latter approach seems to conflict with 1 Kgs 6:1; see also Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 8.3.1 (8.61).</p></p>
<p id="n4401382"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401382">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after these things.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401383"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401383">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the time of” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4401384"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401384">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “who ruled” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. They have been supplied as a clarification for the English reader. See Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 6.14.9 (6.378).</p></p>
<p id="n4401385"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401385">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401386"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401386">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>raised up</i> refers here to making someone king. There is a wordplay here: “raising up” refers to bringing someone onto the scene of history, but it echoes with the parallel to Jesus’ resurrection.</p></p>
<p id="n4401387"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401387">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about whom.” The relative pronoun (“whom”) was replaced by the pronoun “him” and a new sentence was begun in the translation at this point to improve the English style, due to the length of the sentence in Greek. The verb <span class="greek">εἶπεν</span> (<span class="translit">eipen</span>) has not been translated (literally “he said testifying”) because it is redundant when combined with the participle <span class="greek">μαρτυρήσας</span> (<span class="translit">marturēsas</span>, “testifying”). Instead the construction of verb plus participle has been translated as a single English verb (“testified”).</p></p>
<p id="n4401388"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401388">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 89:20.</p></p>
<p id="n4401389"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401389">89</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from 1 Sam 13:14.</p></p>
<p id="n4401390"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401390">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who will perform all my will,” “who will carry out all my wishes.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401391"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401391">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “From the offspring”; <i>Grk</i> “From the seed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>From the descendants</i> (<i>Grk</i> “seed”). On the importance of the seed promise involving Abraham, see Gal 3:6-29.</p></p>
<p id="n4401392"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401392">92</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>this man</i> is in emphatic position in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n4401393"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401393">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to [his] promise.” The comparative clause “just as he promised” is less awkward in English.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Just as he promised</i>. Note how Paul describes Israel’s history carefully to David and then leaps forward immediately to Jesus. Paul is expounding the initial realization of Davidic promise as it was delivered in Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4401394"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401394">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “John having already proclaimed before his coming a baptism…,” a genitive absolute construction which is awkward in English. A new sentence was begun in the translation at this point.</p></p>
<p id="n4401395"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401395">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the context for clarity, since God is mentioned in the preceding context and John the Baptist in the following clause.</p></p>
<p id="n4401396"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401396">96</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John</i> refers here to John the Baptist.</p></p>
<p id="n4401397"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401397">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a baptism of repentance”; the genitive has been translated as a genitive of purpose.</p></p>
<p id="n4401398"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401398">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “task.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401399"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n4401399">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἔλεγεν</span> (<span class="translit">elegen</span>) has been translated as an iterative imperfect, since John undoubtedly said this or something similar on numerous occasions. </p></p>
<p id="n44013100"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> Literally a relative clause, “of whom I am not worthy to untie the sandals of his feet.” Because of the awkwardness of this construction in English, a new sentence was begun here.</p></p>
<p id="n44013101"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Men brothers,” but this is both awkward and unnecessary in English.</p></p>
<p id="n44013102"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sons”</p></p>
<p id="n44013103"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “race.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013104"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and those among you who fear God,” but this is practically a technical term for the category called <i>God-fearers</i>, Gentiles who worshiped the God of Israel and in many cases kept the Mosaic law, but did not take the final step of circumcision necessary to become a proselyte to Judaism. See further K. G. Kuhn, <i>TDNT</i> 6:732-34, 743-44. Note how Paul includes God-fearing Gentiles as recipients of this promise.</p></p>
<p id="n44013105"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “word.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013106"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 12-13 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀγνοέω</span> 1.b gives “<i>not to know</i> w. acc. of pers.” as the meaning here, but “recognize” is a better translation in this context because recognition of the true identity of the one they condemned is the issue. See Acts 2:22-24; 4:26-28.</p></p>
<p id="n44013107"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013108"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> Usually <span class="greek">φωνή</span> (<span class="translit">phōnē</span>) means “voice,” but BDAG 1071-72 s.v. <span class="greek">φωνή</span> 2.c has “Also of sayings in scripture…Ac 13:27.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>They fulfilled the sayings</i>. The people in Jerusalem and the Jewish rulers should have known better, because they had the story read to them weekly in the synagogue.</p></p>
<p id="n44013109"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">κρίναντες</span> (<span class="translit">krinantes</span>) is instrumental here.</p></p>
<p id="n44013110"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “him” is not in the Greek text but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n44013111"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And though.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n44013112"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">εὑρόντες</span> (<span class="translit">heurontes</span>) has been translated as a concessive adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n44013113"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013113">113</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>No basis</i>. Luke insists on Jesus’ innocence again and again in Luke 23:1-25.</p></p>
<p id="n44013114"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “no basis for death,” but in this context a sentence of death is clearly indicated.</p></p>
<p id="n44013115"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “carried out.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013116"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013116">116</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, <i>everything that was written</i> in OT scripture.</p></p>
<p id="n44013117"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “taking him down from the cross, they placed him.” The participle <span class="greek">καθελόντες</span> (<span class="translit">kathelontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44013118"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “tree,” but frequently figurative for a cross. The allusion is to Deut 21:23. See Acts 5:30; 10:39.</p></p>
<p id="n44013119"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “him” is not in the Greek text but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n44013120"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013120">120</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the phrase “raised up” in v. 22, which is the same Greek verb used here.</p></p>
<p id="n44013121"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” The relative pronoun (“who”) was replaced by the conjunction “and” and the pronoun “he” at this point to improve the English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44013122"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013122">122</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Those who had accompanied him</i> refers to the disciples, who knew Jesus in ministry. Luke is aware of resurrection appearances in Galilee though he did not relate any of them in Luke 24.</p></p>
<p id="n44013123"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” The relative pronoun (“who”) was replaced by the demonstrative pronoun “these” and a new sentence was begun in the translation at this point to improve the English style, due to the length of the sentence in Greek and the awkwardness of two relative clauses (“who for many days appeared” and “who are now his witnesses”) following one another.</p></p>
<p id="n44013124"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to our forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “the fathers.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013125"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that this”; the referent (the promise mentioned in the previous verse) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>This promise</i> refers to the promise of a Savior through the seed (descendants) of David that is proclaimed as fulfilled (Rom 1:1-7).</p></p>
<p id="n44013126"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “by resurrecting.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναστήσας</span> (<span class="translit">anastēsas</span>) is taken as instrumental here.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>By raising</i> (i.e., by resurrection) tells how this promise came to be realized, though again the wordplay also points to his presence in history through this event (see the note on “raised up” in v. 22).</p></p>
<p id="n44013127"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013127">127</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>You are my Son</i>. The key to how the quotation is used is the naming of Jesus as “Son” to the Father. The language is that of kingship, as Ps 2 indicates. Here is the promise about what the ultimate Davidic heir would be.</p></p>
<p id="n44013128"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I have begotten you.” The traditional translation for <span class="greek">γεγέννηκα</span> (<span class="translit">gegennēka</span>, “begotten”) is misleading to the modern English reader because it is no longer in common use. Today one speaks of “fathering” a child in much the same way speakers of English formerly spoke of “begetting a child.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 2:7.</p></p>
<p id="n44013129"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44013130"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although <span class="greek">μηκέτι</span> (<span class="translit">mēketi</span>) can mean “no longer” or “no more,” the latter is more appropriate here, since to translate “no longer” in this context could give the reader the impression that Jesus did experience decay before his resurrection. Since the phrase “no more again to be” is somewhat awkward in English, the simpler phrase “never again to be” was used instead.</p></p>
<p id="n44013131"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “to be in again” for <span class="greek">ὑποστρέφω</span> (<span class="translit">hupostrephō</span>) is given in L&amp;N 13.24.</p></p>
<p id="n44013132"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44013133"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> The pronoun “you” is plural here. The promises of David are offered to the people.</p></p>
<p id="n44013134"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the trustworthy decrees made by God to David.” The phrase <span class="greek">τὰ ὅσια Δαυὶδ τὰ πιστά</span> (<span class="translit">ta hosia Dauid ta pista</span>) is “compressed,” that is, in a very compact or condensed form. It could be expanded in several different ways. BDAG 728 s.v. <span class="greek">ὅσιος</span> 3 understands it to refer to divine decrees: “I will grant you the sure decrees of God relating to David.” BDAG then states that this quotation from Isa 55:3 is intended to show that the following quotation from Ps 16:10 could not refer to David himself, but must refer to his messianic descendant (Jesus). L&amp;N 33.290 render the phrase “I will give to you the divine promises made to David, promises that can be trusted,” although they also note that <span class="greek">τὰ ὅσια</span> in Acts 13:34 can mean “divine decrees” or “decrees made by God.” In contemporary English it is less awkward to translate <span class="greek">πιστά</span> as an adjective (“trustworthy”). The concept of “divine decrees,” not very understandable to the modern reader, has been replaced by “promises,” and since God is the implied speaker in the context, it is clear that these promises were made by God.</p></p>
<p id="n44013135"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013135">135</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 55:3. The point of this citation is to make clear that the promise of a Davidic line and blessings are made to the people as well.</p></p>
<p id="n44013136"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Therefore he also says in another”; the word “psalm” is not in the Greek text but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n44013137"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word translated “Holy One” here (<span class="greek">ὅσιόν</span>, <span class="translit">hosion</span>) is related to the use of <span class="greek">ὅσια</span> (<span class="translit">hosia</span>) in v. 34. The link is a wordplay. The Holy One, who does not die, brings the faithful holy blessings of promise to the people.</p></p>
<p id="n44013138"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to see,” but the literal translation of the phrase “to see decay” could be misunderstood to mean simply “to look at decay,” while here “see decay” is really figurative for “experience decay.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013139"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013139">139</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 16:10.</p></p>
<p id="n44013140"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ὑπηρετήσας</span> (<span class="translit">hupēretēsas</span>) is taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n44013141"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013141">141</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">κοιμάω</span> (<span class="translit">koimaō</span>) literally means “sleep,” but it is often used in the Bible as a euphemism for the death of a believer.</p></p>
<p id="n44013142"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013142">142</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “was gathered to his fathers” (a Semitic idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n44013143"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013143">143</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saw,” but the literal translation of the phrase “saw decay” could be misunderstood to mean simply “looked at decay,” while here “saw decay” is really figurative for “experienced decay.” This remark explains why David cannot fulfill the promise.</p></p>
<p id="n44013144"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013144">144</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>one whom God raised up</i> refers to Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n44013145"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013145">145</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “see,” but the literal translation of the phrase “did not see decay” could be misunderstood to mean simply “did not look at decay,” while here “did not see decay” is really figurative for “did not experience decay.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013146"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013146">146</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, Jesus. This pronoun is in emphatic position in the Greek text. Following this phrase in the Greek text is the pronoun <span class="greek">ὑμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">humin</span>, “to you”), so that the emphasis for the audience is that “through Jesus to you” these promises have come.</p></p>
<p id="n44013147"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013147">147</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>This one</i> refers here to Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n44013148"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013148">148</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is freed.” The translation of <span class="greek">δικαιωθῆναι</span> (<span class="translit">dikaiōthēnai</span>) and <span class="greek">δικαιοῦται</span> (<span class="translit">dikaioutai</span>) in Acts 13:38-39 is difficult. BDAG 249 s.v. <span class="greek">δικαιόω</span> 3 categorizes <span class="greek">δικαιωθῆναι</span> in 13:38 (Greek text) under the meaning “<i>make free/pure</i>” but categorizes <span class="greek">δικαιοῦται</span> in Acts 13:39 as “<i>be found in the right, be free of charges</i>” (BDAG 249 s.v. <span class="greek">δικαιόω</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">β</span>). In the interest of consistency both verbs are rendered as “justified” in this translation.</p></p>
<p id="n44013149"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013149">149</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “could not free.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013150"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013150">150</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from everything from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses.” The passive construction has been converted to an active one in the translation, with “by the law of Moses” becoming the subject of the final clause. The words “from everything from which the law of Moses could not justify you” are part of v. 38 in the Greek text, but due to English style and word order must be placed in v. 39 in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n44013151"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013151">151</a> <p><b>sn</b> The speech closes with a warning, “<i>Watch out</i>,” that also stresses culpability.</p></p>
<p id="n44013152"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013152">152</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013153"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013153">153</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and die!”</p></p>
<p id="n44013154"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013154">154</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Hab 1:5. The irony in the phrase <i>even if someone tells you</i>, of course, is that Paul has now told them. So the call in the warning is to believe or else face the peril of being scoffers whom God will judge. The parallel from Habakkuk is that the nation failed to see how Babylon’s rising to power meant perilous judgment for Israel.</p></p>
<p id="n44013155"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013155">155</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referents (Paul and Barnabas) have been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44013156"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013156">156</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “were leaving.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐξιόντων</span> (<span class="translit">exiontōn</span>) is taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n44013157"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013157">157</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the people) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44013158"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013158">158</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “begging,” “inviting.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013159"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013159">159</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “matters.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013160"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013160">160</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n44013161"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013161">161</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 607 s.v. <span class="greek">λύω</span> 3 has “<span class="greek">λυθείσης τ</span>.<span class="greek"> συναγωγῆς</span> <i>when the meeting of the synagogue had broken up</i> Ac 13:43.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013162"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013162">162</a> <p><b>tn</b> Normally the phrase <span class="greek">σεβόμενοι τὸν θεόν</span> (<span class="translit">sebomenoi ton theon</span>) refers to Gentiles (“God-fearers”) who believed in God, attended the synagogue, and followed the Mosaic law to some extent, but stopped short of undergoing circumcision. BDAG 918 s.v. <span class="greek">σέβω</span> 1.b lists in this category references in Acts 16:14; 18:7; with <span class="greek">σεβόμενοι</span> alone, Acts 13:50; 17:4, 17; the phrase is also found in Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 14.7.2 (14.110). Unique to this particular verse is the combination <span class="greek">σεβόμενοι προσηλύτων</span> (<span class="translit">sebomenoi prosēlutōn</span>). Later rabbinic discussion suggests that to be regarded as a proper proselyte, a Gentile male had to submit to circumcision. If that is the case here, these Gentiles in the synagogue at Pisidian Antioch should be regarded as full proselytes who had converted completely to Judaism and undergone circumcision. It is probably more likely, however, that <span class="greek">προσηλύτων</span> is used here in a somewhat looser sense (note the use of <span class="greek">σεβομένας</span> [<span class="translit">sebomenas</span>] alone to refer to women in Acts 13:50) and that these Gentiles were still in the category commonly called “God-fearers” without being full, technical proselytes to Judaism. See further K. G. Kuhn, <i>TDNT</i> 6:732-34, 743-44. Regardless, the point is that many Gentiles, as well as Jews, came to faith.</p></p>
<p id="n44013163"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013163">163</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is the meaning given for <span class="greek">ἔπειθον</span> (<span class="translit">epeithon</span>) in this verse by BDAG 791 s.v. <span class="greek">πείθω</span> 1.b.</p></p>
<p id="n44013164"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013164">164</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who, as they were speaking with them, were persuading them.” </p></p>
<p id="n44013165"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013165">165</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">προμένειν</span> (<span class="translit">promenein</span>) is similar in force to the use of <span class="greek">μένω</span> (<span class="translit">menō</span>, “to reside/remain”) in the Gospel and Epistles of John.</p></p>
<p id="n44013166"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013166">166</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B* C E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy bo) read <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">theou</span>, “of God”) here instead of <span class="greek">κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">kuriou</span>, “of the Lord”). Other <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, among them some significant early witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B<sup>2</sup> 33 81 323 945 1175 1739 <i>al</i> sa), read <span class="greek">κυρίου</span>. The external evidence favors <span class="greek">κυρίου</span>, though not decisively. Internally, the mention of “God” in v. 43, and especially “the word of God” in v. 46, would provide some temptation for scribes to assimilate the wording in v. 44 to these texts.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The word of the Lord</i> is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; Luke 22:61, Acts 11:16, 1 Pet 1:25) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; here and in vv. 48 and 49; Acts 8:25; 15:35, 36; 16:32; 19:10, 20; 1 Thess 1:8; 4:15; 2 Thess 3:1). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said.</p></p>
<p id="n44013167"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013167">167</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They were filled with jealousy</i>. Their foolish response to the gospel is noted again (see Acts 5:17; 7:9; 17:5). </p></p>
<p id="n44013168"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013168">168</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἀντέλεγον</span> (<span class="translit">antelegon</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect in the logical sequence of events: After they were filled with jealousy, the Jewish opponents began to contradict what Paul said.</p></p>
<p id="n44013169"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013169">169</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the things being said by Paul.” For smoothness and simplicity of English style, the passive construction has been converted to active voice in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n44013170"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013170">170</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">βλασφημοῦντες</span> (<span class="translit">blasphēmountes</span>) has been regarded as indicating the means of the action of the main verb. It could also be translated as a finite verb (“and reviled him”) in keeping with contemporary English style. The direct object (“him”) is implied rather than expressed and could be impersonal (“it,” referring to what Paul was saying rather than Paul himself), but the verb occurs more often in contexts involving defamation or slander against personal beings (not always God). For a very similar context to this one, compare Acts 18:6. The translation “blaspheme” is not used because in contemporary English its meaning is more narrowly defined and normally refers to blasphemy against God (not what Paul’s opponents were doing here). The modern term “slandering” comes close to what was being done to Paul here.</p></p>
<p id="n44013171"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013171">171</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Both Paul and Barnabas spoke out courageously and said.” The redundancy is removed in the translation and the verb “replied” is used in keeping with the logical sequence of events. The theme of boldness reappears: Acts 4:24-30; 9:27-28.</p></p>
<p id="n44013172"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013172">172</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It was necessary that the word of God be spoken.” For smoothness and simplicity of English style, the passive construction has been converted to active voice in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n44013173"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013173">173</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and consider yourselves unworthy.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013174"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013174">174</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold, we.” In this context <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) is not easily translated into English.</p></p>
<p id="n44013175"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013175">175</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>turning to the Gentiles</i> would be a shocking rebuke to 1st century Jews who thought they alone were the recipients of the promise.</p></p>
<p id="n44013176"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013176">176</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">οὕτως</span> (<span class="translit">houtōs</span>) is taken to refer to what follows, the content of the quotation, as given for this verse by BDAG 742 s.v. <span class="greek">οὕτω</span>/<span class="greek">οὕτως</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n44013177"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013177">177</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1004 s.v. <span class="greek">τίθημι</span> 3.a has “<span class="greek">τιθέναι τινὰ εἴς τι</span> <i>place/appoint someone to</i> or <i>for (to function as) someth…</i>.Ac 13:47.” This is a double accusative construction of object (“you”) and complement (“a light”).</p></p>
<p id="n44013178"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013178">178</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul alludes here to the language of the Servant in Isaiah, pointing to Isa 42:6; 49:6. He and Barnabas do the work of the Servant in Isaiah.</p></p>
<p id="n44013179"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013179">179</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that you should be for salvation,” but more simply “to bring salvation.”</p></p>
<p id="n44013180"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013180">180</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 42:6 and 49:6. The expression <i>the ends of the earth</i> recalls Luke 3:6 and Acts 1:8. Paul sees himself and Barnabas as carrying out the commission of Luke 24:27. (See 2 Cor 6:2, where servant imagery also appears concerning Paul’s message.)</p></p>
<p id="n44013181"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013181">181</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἔχαιρον</span> (<span class="translit">echairon</span>) and the following <span class="greek">ἐδόξαζον</span> (<span class="translit">edoxazon</span>) are translated as ingressive imperfects.</p></p>
<p id="n44013182"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013182">182</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “glorify.” Although “honor” is given by BDAG 258 s.v. <span class="greek">δοξάζω</span> as a translation, it would be misleading here, because the meaning is “to honor in the sense of attributing worth to something,” while in contemporary English usage one speaks of “honoring” a contract in the sense of keeping its stipulations. It is not a synonym for “obey” in this context (“obey the word of the Lord”), but that is how many English readers would understand it.</p></p>
<p id="n44013183"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013183">183</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note the contrast to v. 46 in regard to <i>eternal life</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n44013184"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013184">184</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 239 s.v. <span class="greek">διαφέρω</span> 1 has “<i>spread</i>” for <span class="greek">διαφέρετο</span> (<span class="translit">diaphereto</span>) in connection with a teaching. This is the first summary since Acts 9:31.</p></p>
<p id="n44013185"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013185">185</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation of <span class="greek">παρώτρυναν</span> (<span class="translit">parōtrunan</span>) as “incited” see BDAG 780 s.v. <span class="greek">παροτρύνω</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n44013186"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013186">186</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 299 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐκβάλλω</span> 1 has “<i>throw out</i>.” Once again, many Jews reacted to the message (Acts 5:17, 33; 6:11; 13:45).</p></p>
<p id="n44013187"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013187">187</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἐκτιναξάμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">ektinaxamenoi</span>) is taken temporally. It could also be translated as a participle of attendant circumstance (“So they shook…and went”).</p></p>
<p id="n44013188"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013188">188</a> <p><b>sn</b> Shaking <i>the dust off their feet</i> was a symbolic gesture commanded by Jesus to his disciples, Matt 10:14; Mark 6:11; Luke 9:5. It shows a group of people as culpable before God.</p></p>
<p id="n44013189"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013189">189</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Iconium</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 90 mi (145 km) east southeast of Pisidian Antioch. </p></p>
<p id="n44013190"><a href="file1075.xhtml#n44013190">190</a> <p><b>sn</b> The believers of Pisidian Antioch were not discouraged by the persecution, but instead were <i>filled with joy</i>.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
