<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Timothy 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Timothy<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Serving Faithfully Despite Hardship</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> So you, my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">2:2</span> And what you heard me say<sup><a id="n550021" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n550021">1</a></sup> in the presence of many witnesses<sup><a id="n550022" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n550022">2</a></sup> entrust to faithful people<sup><a id="n550023" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n550023">3</a></sup> who will be competent<sup><a id="n550024" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n550024">4</a></sup> to teach others as well. <span class="verse">2:3</span> Take your share of suffering<sup><a id="n550025" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n550025">5</a></sup> as a good soldier of Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">2:4</span> No one in military service gets entangled in matters of everyday life; otherwise he will not please<sup><a id="n550026" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n550026">6</a></sup> the one who recruited him. <span class="verse">2:5</span> Also, if anyone competes as an athlete, he will not be crowned as the winner<sup><a id="n550027" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n550027">7</a></sup> unless he competes according to the rules.<sup><a id="n550028" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n550028">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:6</span> The farmer who works hard ought to have the first share of the crops. <span class="verse">2:7</span> Think about what I am saying and<sup><a id="n550029" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n550029">9</a></sup> the Lord will give you understanding of all this.<sup><a id="n5500210" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500210">10</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:8</span> Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, a descendant of David;<sup><a id="n5500211" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500211">11</a></sup> such is my gospel,<sup><a id="n5500212" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500212">12</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:9</span> for which I suffer hardship to the point of imprisonment<sup><a id="n5500213" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500213">13</a></sup> as a criminal, but God’s message<sup><a id="n5500214" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500214">14</a></sup> is not imprisoned!<sup><a id="n5500215" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500215">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:10</span> So I endure all things for the sake of those chosen by God,<sup><a id="n5500216" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500216">16</a></sup> that they too may obtain salvation in Christ Jesus and its eternal glory.<sup><a id="n5500217" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500217">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:11</span> This saying<sup><a id="n5500218" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500218">18</a></sup> is trustworthy:<sup><a id="n5500219" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500219">19</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">If we died with him, we will also live with him.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:12</span> If we endure, we will also reign with him.<sup><a id="n5500220" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500220">20</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">If we deny<sup><a id="n5500221" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500221">21</a></sup> him,<sup><a id="n5500222" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500222">22</a></sup> he will also deny us. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">2:13</span> If we are unfaithful, he remains faithful, since he cannot deny himself.<sup><a id="n5500223" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500223">23</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Dealing with False Teachers</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:14</span> Remind people<sup><a id="n5500224" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500224">24</a></sup> of these things and solemnly charge them<sup><a id="n5500225" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500225">25</a></sup> before the Lord<sup><a id="n5500226" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500226">26</a></sup> not to wrangle over words. This is of no benefit; it just brings ruin on those who listen.<sup><a id="n5500227" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500227">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:15</span> Make every effort to present yourself before God as a proven worker who does not need to be ashamed, teaching the message of truth accurately.<sup><a id="n5500228" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500228">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:16</span> But avoid profane chatter,<sup><a id="n5500229" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500229">29</a></sup> because those occupied with it will stray further and further into ungodliness,<sup><a id="n5500230" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500230">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:17</span> and their message will spread its infection<sup><a id="n5500231" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500231">31</a></sup> like gangrene. Hymenaeus and Philetus are in this group.<sup><a id="n5500232" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500232">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:18</span> They have strayed from the truth<sup><a id="n5500233" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500233">33</a></sup> by saying that the resurrection has already occurred, and they are undermining some people’s faith. <span class="verse">2:19</span> However, God’s solid foundation remains standing, bearing this seal: “<b><i>The Lord knows those who are his</i></b>,”<sup><a id="n5500234" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500234">34</a></sup> and “Everyone who confesses the name of the Lord<sup><a id="n5500235" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500235">35</a></sup> must turn away from evil.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:20</span> Now in a wealthy home<sup><a id="n5500236" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500236">36</a></sup> there are not only gold and silver vessels, but also ones made of wood and of clay, and some are for honorable use, but others for ignoble use.<sup><a id="n5500237" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500237">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:21</span> So if someone cleanses himself of such behavior,<sup><a id="n5500238" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500238">38</a></sup> he will be a vessel for honorable use, set apart, useful for the Master, prepared for every good work. <span class="verse">2:22</span> But keep away from youthful passions, and pursue righteousness, faithfulness, love, and peace, in company with others<sup><a id="n5500239" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500239">39</a></sup> who call on the Lord from a pure heart.<sup><a id="n5500240" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500240">40</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:23</span> But reject foolish and ignorant<sup><a id="n5500241" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500241">41</a></sup> controversies, because you know they breed infighting.<sup><a id="n5500242" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500242">42</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:24</span> And the Lord’s slave<sup><a id="n5500243" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500243">43</a></sup> must not engage in heated disputes<sup><a id="n5500244" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500244">44</a></sup> but be kind toward all, an apt teacher, patient, <span class="verse">2:25</span> correcting<sup><a id="n5500245" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500245">45</a></sup> opponents with gentleness. Perhaps God will grant them repentance and then knowledge of the truth<sup><a id="n5500246" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500246">46</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:26</span> and they will come to their senses and escape the devil’s trap where they are held captive<sup><a id="n5500247" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500247">47</a></sup> to do his will.<sup><a id="n5500248" href="file1182_notes.xhtml#n5500248">48</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>