<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Timothy 4</h2>
<p id="n540041"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n540041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert the faith by occupying themselves.”</p></p>
<p id="n540042"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n540042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “teachings of demons” (speaking of the source of these doctrines).</p></p>
<p id="n540043"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n540043">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the hypocrisy of liars.”</p></p>
<p id="n540044"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n540044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “branded.” The Greek verb <span class="greek">καυστηριάζω</span> (<span class="translit">kaustēriazō</span>) can be used to refer either to the cause (“brand”) or the effect (“seared”).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Consciences are seared</i>. The precise meaning of this phrase is somewhat debated. Three primary interpretations are (1) the consciences of these false teachers are “branded” with Satan’s mark to indicate ownership, (2) their consciences are “branded” with a penal mark to show they are lawbreakers, or (3) their consciences have been “seared” (i.e., totally burnt and desensitized) so that they are unable to notice the difference between right and wrong. See G. W. Knight, <i>Pastoral Epistles</i> (NIGTC), 189.</p></p>
<p id="n540045"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n540045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “nothing.”</p></p>
<p id="n540046"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n540046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” or “fellow Christians” as here (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited).</p></p>
<p id="n540047"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n540047">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>By pointing out…you have followed</i>. This verse gives a theme statement for what follows in the chapter about Timothy’s ministry. The situation in Ephesus requires him to be a good servant of Christ, and he will do that by sound teaching and by living an exemplary life himself.</p></p>
<p id="n540048"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n540048">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Those myths</i> refer to legendary tales characteristic of the false teachers in Ephesus and Crete. See parallels in 1 Tim 1:4; 2 Tim 4:4; and Titus 1:14.</p></p>
<p id="n540049"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n540049">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the godless and old-wifely myths.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400410"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “bodily training” (using the noun form of the verb “train” in v. 7b).</p></p>
<p id="n5400411"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the saying.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>This saying</i>. The literal phrase “the saying” refers to the preceding citation. See 1 Tim 1:15; 3:1; 2 Tim 2:11; Titus 3:8 for other occurrences of this phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n5400412"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for toward this,” denoting purpose. The conjunction “for” gives confirmation or emphasis to 1 Tim 4:8-9.</p></p>
<p id="n5400413"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400413">13</a> <p><b>tc</b> A number of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D 0241<sup>vid</sup> 1241 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> latt sy co) read <span class="greek">ὀνειδιζόμεθα</span> (<span class="translit">oneidizometha</span>, “suffer reproach”), while the reading behind the translation (<span class="greek">ἀγωνιζόμεθα</span>, <span class="translit">agōnizometha</span>) is supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A C F G K <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1505 <i>al</i>. The reading from the verb <span class="greek">ἀγωνίζομαι</span> (<span class="translit">agōnizomai</span>) has somewhat better external credentials, but this verb is found in the <i>corpus Paulinum</i> five other times, twice in the Pastorals (1 Tim 6:12; 2 Tim 4:7). The verb <span class="greek">ὀνειδίζω</span> (<span class="translit">oneidizō</span>) occurs only once in Paul (Rom 15:3), not at all in the Pastorals. In this instance, transcriptional and intrinsic evidence might seem to be opposed to each other. In such cases, the external evidence should be given more weight. With some hesitation, <span class="greek">ἀγωνιζόμεθα</span> is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n5400414"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>) is used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women, and is thus translated “people.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400415"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faith.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400416"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “reading.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The public reading of scripture</i> refers to reading the scripture out loud in the church services. In a context where many were illiterate and few could afford private copies of scripture, such public reading was especially important.</p></p>
<p id="n5400417"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in you.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400418"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which was given to you through prophecy.” Here as in 2:15 the preposition “through” denotes not “means” but accompanying circumstances: “accompanied by prophecy.”</p><p><b>sn</b> These <i>prophetic words</i> perhaps spoke of what God would do through Timothy in his ministry (cf. 1 Tim 1:18).</p></p>
<p id="n5400419"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with the imposition of the hands of the presbytery” (i.e., the council of elders).</p></p>
<p id="n5400420"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that your progress may be evident to all.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400421"><a href="file1177.xhtml#n5400421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about yourself and your teaching.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
