<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Thessalonians 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Thessalonians<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul<sup><a id="n530011" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n530011">1</a></sup> and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">1:2</span> Grace and peace to you<sup><a id="n530013" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n530013">3</a></sup> from God the<sup><a id="n530014" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n530014">4</a></sup> Father and the Lord Jesus Christ! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Thanksgiving</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:3</span> We ought to thank God always for you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n530015" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n530015">5</a></sup> and rightly so,<sup><a id="n530016" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n530016">6</a></sup> because your faith flourishes more and more and the love of each one of you all for one another is ever greater. <span class="verse">1:4</span> As a result we ourselves boast about you in the churches of God for your perseverance and faith in all the persecutions and afflictions you are enduring. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Encouragement in Persecution</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:5</span> This is evidence of God’s righteous judgment, to make you worthy<sup><a id="n530017" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n530017">7</a></sup> of the kingdom of God, for which in fact you are suffering. <span class="verse">1:6</span> For it is right<sup><a id="n530018" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n530018">8</a></sup> for God to repay with affliction those who afflict you, <span class="verse">1:7</span> and to you who are being afflicted to give rest together with us when the Lord Jesus is revealed<sup><a id="n530019" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n530019">9</a></sup> from heaven with his mighty angels.<sup><a id="n5300110" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n5300110">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:8</span> <i>With</i> <i>flaming fire he will mete out</i><sup><a id="n5300111" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n5300111">11</a></sup> <i>punishment</i> <i>on those who do not know God</i><sup><a id="n5300112" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n5300112">12</a></sup> and do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus. <span class="verse">1:9</span> They<sup><a id="n5300113" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n5300113">13</a></sup> will undergo the penalty of eternal destruction, <i>away from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his strength</i>,<sup><a id="n5300114" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n5300114">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:10</span> when he comes to be glorified among his saints and admired<sup><a id="n5300115" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n5300115">15</a></sup> on that day among all who have believed—and you did in fact believe our testimony.<sup><a id="n5300116" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n5300116">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:11</span> And in this regard we pray for you always, that our God will make you worthy of his calling<sup><a id="n5300117" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n5300117">17</a></sup> and fulfill by his power your every desire for goodness and every work of faith, <span class="verse">1:12</span> that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to<sup><a id="n5300118" href="file1170_notes.xhtml#n5300118">18</a></sup> the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ. </p>

</body>
</html>