<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 16</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 16</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Demand for a Sign </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:1</span> Now when the Pharisees<sup><a id="n400161" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n400161">1</a></sup> and Sadducees<sup><a id="n400162" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n400162">2</a></sup> came to test Jesus,<sup><a id="n400163" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n400163">3</a></sup> they asked him to show them a sign from heaven.<sup><a id="n400164" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n400164">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">16:2</span> He<sup><a id="n400165" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n400165">5</a></sup> said, “When evening comes you say, ‘It will be fair weather, because the sky is red,’ <span class="verse">16:3</span> and in the morning, ‘It will be stormy today, because the sky is red and darkening.’<sup><a id="n400166" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n400166">6</a></sup> You know how to judge correctly the appearance of the sky,<sup><a id="n400167" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n400167">7</a></sup> but you cannot evaluate the signs of the times. <span class="verse">16:4</span> A wicked and adulterous generation asks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah.” Then<sup><a id="n400168" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n400168">8</a></sup> he left them and went away. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:5</span> When the disciples went to the other side, they forgot to take bread. <span class="verse">16:6</span> “Watch out,” Jesus said to them, “beware of the yeast of the Pharisees<sup><a id="n400169" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n400169">9</a></sup> and Sadducees.”<sup><a id="n4001610" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001610">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">16:7</span> So<sup><a id="n4001611" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001611">11</a></sup> they began to discuss this among themselves, saying, “It is because we brought no bread.” <span class="verse">16:8</span> When Jesus learned of this,<sup><a id="n4001612" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001612">12</a></sup> he said, “You who have such little faith! Why are you arguing<sup><a id="n4001613" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001613">13</a></sup> among yourselves about having no bread? <span class="verse">16:9</span> Do you still not understand? Don’t you remember the five loaves for the 5,000, and how many baskets you took up? <span class="verse">16:10</span> Or the seven loaves for the 4,000 and how many baskets you took up? <span class="verse">16:11</span> How could you not understand that I was not speaking to you about bread? But beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees!” <span class="verse">16:12</span> Then they understood that he had not told them to be on guard against the yeast in bread, but against the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Peter’s Confession </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:13</span> When<sup><a id="n4001614" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001614">14</a></sup> Jesus came to the area of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples,<sup><a id="n4001616" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001616">16</a></sup> “Who do people say that the Son of Man is?” <span class="verse">16:14</span> They answered, “Some say John the Baptist, others Elijah,<sup><a id="n4001617" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001617">17</a></sup> and others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.” <span class="verse">16:15</span> He said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” <span class="verse">16:16</span> Simon Peter answered,<sup><a id="n4001618" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001618">18</a></sup> “You are the Christ,<sup><a id="n4001619" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001619">19</a></sup> the Son of the living God.” <span class="verse">16:17</span> And Jesus answered him,<sup><a id="n4001620" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001620">20</a></sup> “You are blessed, Simon son of Jonah, because flesh and blood<sup><a id="n4001621" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001621">21</a></sup> did not reveal this to you, but my Father in heaven! <span class="verse">16:18</span> And I tell you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades<sup><a id="n4001622" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001622">22</a></sup> will not overpower it. <span class="verse">16:19</span> I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Whatever you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven, and whatever you release on earth will have been released in heaven.” <span class="verse">16:20</span> Then he instructed his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Christ.<sup><a id="n4001623" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001623">23</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">First Prediction of Jesus’ Death and Resurrection</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:21</span> From that time on<sup><a id="n4001624" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001624">24</a></sup> Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer<sup><a id="n4001626" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001626">26</a></sup> many things at the hands of the elders, chief priests, and experts in the law,<sup><a id="n4001627" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001627">27</a></sup> and be killed, and on the third day be raised. <span class="verse">16:22</span> So Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him:<sup><a id="n4001628" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001628">28</a></sup> “God forbid,<sup><a id="n4001629" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001629">29</a></sup> Lord! This must not happen to you!” <span class="verse">16:23</span> But he turned and said to Peter, “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, because you are not setting your mind on God’s interests, but on man’s.”<sup><a id="n4001630" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001630">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">16:24</span> Then Jesus said to his disciples, “If anyone wants to become my follower,<sup><a id="n4001631" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001631">31</a></sup> he must deny<sup><a id="n4001632" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001632">32</a></sup> himself, take up his cross,<sup><a id="n4001633" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001633">33</a></sup> and follow me. <span class="verse">16:25</span> For whoever wants to save his life<sup><a id="n4001634" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001634">34</a></sup> will lose it,<sup><a id="n4001635" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001635">35</a></sup> but whoever loses his life because of me<sup><a id="n4001636" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001636">36</a></sup> will find it. <span class="verse">16:26</span> For what does it benefit a person<sup><a id="n4001637" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001637">37</a></sup> if he gains the whole world but forfeits his life? Or what can a person give in exchange for his life? <span class="verse">16:27</span> For the Son of Man will come with his angels in the glory of his Father, and then <i>he will reward each person according to what he has done</i>.<sup><a id="n4001638" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001638">38</a></sup> <span class="verse">16:28</span> I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4001639" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001639">39</a></sup> there are some standing here who will not<sup><a id="n4001640" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001640">40</a></sup> experience<sup><a id="n4001641" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001641">41</a></sup> death before they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.”<sup><a id="n4001642" href="file985_notes.xhtml#n4001642">42</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>