<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul,<sup><a id="n450011" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n450011">1</a></sup> a slave<sup><a id="n450012" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n450012">2</a></sup> of Christ Jesus,<sup><a id="n450013" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n450013">3</a></sup> called to be an apostle,<sup><a id="n450014" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n450014">4</a></sup> set apart for the gospel of God.<sup><a id="n450015" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n450015">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:2</span> This gospel<sup><a id="n450016" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n450016">6</a></sup> he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy scriptures, <span class="verse">1:3</span> concerning his Son who was a descendant<sup><a id="n450017" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n450017">7</a></sup> of David with reference to the flesh,<sup><a id="n450018" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n450018">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:4</span> who was appointed the Son-of-God-in-power<sup><a id="n450019" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n450019">9</a></sup> according to the Holy Spirit<sup><a id="n4500110" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500110">10</a></sup> by the resurrection<sup><a id="n4500111" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500111">11</a></sup> from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord. <span class="verse">1:5</span> Through him<sup><a id="n4500112" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500112">12</a></sup> we have received grace and our apostleship<sup><a id="n4500113" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500113">13</a></sup> to bring about the obedience<sup><a id="n4500114" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500114">14</a></sup> of faith<sup><a id="n4500115" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500115">15</a></sup> among all the Gentiles on behalf of his name. <span class="verse">1:6</span> You also are among them,<sup><a id="n4500116" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500116">16</a></sup> called to belong to Jesus Christ.<sup><a id="n4500117" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500117">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:7</span> To all those loved by God in Rome, called to be saints:<sup><a id="n4500119" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500119">19</a></sup> Grace and peace to you<sup><a id="n4500120" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500120">20</a></sup> from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Desire to Visit Rome</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:8</span> First of all,<sup><a id="n4500121" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500121">21</a></sup> I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is proclaimed throughout the whole world. <span class="verse">1:9</span> For God, whom I serve in my spirit in the gospel<sup><a id="n4500122" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500122">22</a></sup> of his Son, is my witness that<sup><a id="n4500123" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500123">23</a></sup> I continually remember you <span class="verse">1:10</span> and I always ask<sup><a id="n4500124" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500124">24</a></sup> in my prayers, if perhaps now at last I may succeed in visiting you according to the will of God.<sup><a id="n4500125" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500125">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:11</span> For I long to see you, so that I may impart to you some spiritual gift<sup><a id="n4500126" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500126">26</a></sup> to strengthen you, <span class="verse">1:12</span> that is, that we may be mutually comforted by one another’s faith,<sup><a id="n4500127" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500127">27</a></sup> both yours and mine. <span class="verse">1:13</span> I do not want you to be unaware,<sup><a id="n4500128" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500128">28</a></sup> brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n4500129" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500129">29</a></sup> that I often intended to come to you (and was prevented until now), so that I may have some fruit even among you, just as I already have among the rest of the Gentiles.<sup><a id="n4500130" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500130">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:14</span> I am a debtor<sup><a id="n4500131" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500131">31</a></sup> both to the Greeks and to the barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish. <span class="verse">1:15</span> Thus I am eager<sup><a id="n4500132" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500132">32</a></sup> also to preach the gospel to you who are in Rome. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Power of the Gospel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:16</span> For I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is God’s power for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first and also to the Greek.<sup><a id="n4500134" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500134">34</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:17</span> For the righteousness<sup><a id="n4500135" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500135">35</a></sup> of God is revealed in the gospel<sup><a id="n4500136" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500136">36</a></sup> from faith to faith,<sup><a id="n4500137" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500137">37</a></sup> just as it is written, “<b><i>The righteous by faith will live</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4500138" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500138">38</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Condemnation of the Unrighteous</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:18</span> For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of people<sup><a id="n4500139" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500139">39</a></sup> who suppress the truth by their<sup><a id="n4500140" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500140">40</a></sup> unrighteousness,<sup><a id="n4500141" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500141">41</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:19</span> because what can be known about God is plain to them,<sup><a id="n4500142" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500142">42</a></sup> because God has made it plain to them. <span class="verse">1:20</span> For since the creation of the world his invisible attributes—his eternal power and divine nature—have been clearly seen, because they are understood through what has been made. So people<sup><a id="n4500143" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500143">43</a></sup> are without excuse. <span class="verse">1:21</span> For although they knew God, they did not glorify him as God or give him thanks, but they became futile in their thoughts and their senseless hearts<sup><a id="n4500144" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500144">44</a></sup> were darkened. <span class="verse">1:22</span> Although they claimed<sup><a id="n4500145" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500145">45</a></sup> to be wise, they became fools <span class="verse">1:23</span> and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for an image resembling mortal human beings<sup><a id="n4500146" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500146">46</a></sup> or birds or four-footed animals<sup><a id="n4500147" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500147">47</a></sup> or reptiles. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:24</span> Therefore God gave them over<sup><a id="n4500148" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500148">48</a></sup> in the desires of their hearts to impurity,<sup><a id="n4500149" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500149">49</a></sup> to dishonor<sup><a id="n4500150" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500150">50</a></sup> their bodies among themselves.<sup><a id="n4500151" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500151">51</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:25</span> They<sup><a id="n4500152" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500152">52</a></sup> exchanged the truth of God for a lie<sup><a id="n4500153" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500153">53</a></sup> and worshiped and served the creation<sup><a id="n4500154" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500154">54</a></sup> rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever! Amen. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:26</span> For this reason God gave them over to dishonorable passions. For their women exchanged the natural sexual relations for unnatural ones,<sup><a id="n4500155" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500155">55</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:27</span> and likewise the men also abandoned natural relations with women<sup><a id="n4500156" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500156">56</a></sup> and were inflamed in their passions<sup><a id="n4500157" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500157">57</a></sup> for one another. Men<sup><a id="n4500158" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500158">58</a></sup> committed shameless acts with men and received in themselves the due penalty for their error. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:28</span> And just as they did not see fit to acknowledge God,<sup><a id="n4500159" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500159">59</a></sup> God gave them over to a depraved mind, to do what should not be done.<sup><a id="n4500160" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500160">60</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:29</span> They are filled<sup><a id="n4500161" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500161">61</a></sup> with every kind of unrighteousness, wickedness, covetousness, malice. They are rife with<sup><a id="n4500162" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500162">62</a></sup> envy, murder, strife, deceit, hostility. They are gossips, <span class="verse">1:30</span> slanderers, haters of God, insolent, arrogant, boastful, contrivers of all sorts of evil, disobedient to parents, <span class="verse">1:31</span> senseless, covenant-breakers,<sup><a id="n4500163" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500163">63</a></sup> heartless, ruthless. <span class="verse">1:32</span> Although they fully know<sup><a id="n4500164" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500164">64</a></sup> God’s righteous decree that those who practice such things deserve to die,<sup><a id="n4500165" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500165">65</a></sup> they not only do them but also approve of those who practice them.<sup><a id="n4500166" href="file1092_notes.xhtml#n4500166">66</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>