<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 6</h2>
<p id="n440061"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n440061">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these.” The translation uses “those” for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n440062"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n440062">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “were multiplying.”</p></p>
<p id="n440063"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n440063">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Hellenists,” but this descriptive term is largely unknown to the modern English reader. The translation “Greek-speaking Jews” attempts to convey something of who these were, but it was more than a matter of language spoken; it involved a degree of adoption of Greek culture as well.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The Greek-speaking Jews</i> were the Hellenists, Jews who to a greater or lesser extent had adopted Greek thought, customs, and lifestyle, as well as the Greek language. The city of Alexandria in Egypt was a focal point for them, but they were scattered throughout the Roman Empire.</p></p>
<p id="n440064"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n440064">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “against the Hebrews,” but as with “Hellenists” this needs further explanation for the modern reader.</p></p>
<p id="n440065"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n440065">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The care of <i>widows</i> is a major biblical theme: Deut 10:18; 16:11, 14; 24:17, 19-21; 26:12-13; 27:19; Isa 1:17-23; Jer 7:6; Mal 3:5.</p></p>
<p id="n440066"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n440066">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “neglected.”</p></p>
<p id="n440067"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n440067">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the daily serving.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The daily distribution of food</i>. The early church saw it as a responsibility to meet the basic needs of people in their group.</p></p>
<p id="n440068"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n440068">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The twelve</i> refers to the twelve apostles.</p></p>
<p id="n440069"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n440069">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “calling the whole group…together, said.” The participle <span class="greek">προσκαλεσάμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">proskalesamenoi</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400610"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the multitude.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400611"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to serve tables.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400612"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> It is not clear from a historical standpoint (but it is unlikely) that women would have been involved in the selection process too. For this reason the translation “brothers” has been retained, rather than “brothers and sisters” (used in contexts where both male and female believers are clearly addressed).</p></p>
<p id="n4400613"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400613">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Seven</i>. Jewish town councils often had seven members (Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 4.18.14 [4.214]).</p></p>
<p id="n4400614"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “are of good reputation” (BDAG 618 s.v. <span class="greek">μαρτυρέω</span> 2.b).</p></p>
<p id="n4400615"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “<i>put in charge</i>” is given by BDAG 492 s.v. <span class="greek">καθίστημι</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4400616"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of this need”; translated “necessary work” or “needed task” by L&amp;N 42.22.</p></p>
<p id="n4400617"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400618"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “so” has been used to indicate the logical sequence in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4400619"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> “With” is smoother English style for an addition like this. Because of differences between Greek and English style, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>), which occurs between each name in the list, has not been translated except preceding the last element.</p></p>
<p id="n4400620"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400620">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Philip</i>. Note how many of the names in this list are Greek. This suggests that Hellenists were chosen to solve the problem they had been so sensitive about fixing (cf. 6:1).</p></p>
<p id="n4400621"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a proselyte.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400623"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400623">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Literally this is a participle in the Greek text (<span class="greek">προσευξάμενοι</span>, <span class="translit">proseuxamenoi</span>). It could be translated as a finite verb (“and they prayed and placed their hands on them”) but much smoother English results if the entire coordinate clause is converted to a relative clause that refers back to the apostles.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Who prayed</i>. The prayer indicates their acceptance and commissioning for ministry (cf. Deut 34:9).</p></p>
<p id="n4400624"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “laid.” </p></p>
<p id="n4400625"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400625">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “kept on spreading”; the verb has been translated as a progressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4400627"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a great multitude.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>A large group</i>. Many Jews, even some religious leaders, were responding.</p></p>
<p id="n4400628"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400628">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The miraculous nature of these signs is implied in the context. Here the work of miracles extends beyond the Twelve for the first time.</p></p>
<p id="n4400629"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400629">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> A s<i>ynagogue</i> was a place for Jewish prayer and worship, with recognized leadership (cf. Luke 8:41). Though the origin of the synagogue is not entirely clear, it seems to have arisen in the postexilic community during the intertestamental period. A town could establish a synagogue if there were at least ten men. In normative Judaism of the NT period, the OT scripture was read and discussed in the synagogue by the men who were present (see the Mishnah, <i>m. Megillah</i> 3-4; <i>m. Berakhot</i> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4400630"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the so-called Synagogue of the Freedmen.” The translation of the participle <span class="greek">λεγομένης</span> (<span class="translit">legomenēs</span>) by the phrase “as it was called” is given by L&amp;N 87.86. “Freedmen” would be slaves who had gained their freedom, or the descendants of such people (BDAG 594-95 s.v. <span class="greek">Λιβερτῖνος</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4400631"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400631">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n4400632"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.” The context, however, indicates that the conjunction carries an adversative force.</p></p>
<p id="n4400633"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400633">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They were not able to resist</i>. This represents another fulfillment of Luke 12:11-12; 21:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4400634"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400634">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Another translation would be “they suborned” (but this term is not in common usage). “<i>Instigate (secretly), suborn</i>” is given by BDAG 1036 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑποβάλλω</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4400635"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400635">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “heard him,” but since this is direct discourse, it is more natural (and clearer) to specify the referent (Stephen) as “this man.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400636"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400636">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and the,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4400637"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400637">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 4:5.</p></p>
<p id="n4400638"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400638">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “approaching, they seized him”; the referent (Stephen) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400639"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400639">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Sanhedrin” (the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews). Stephen suffers just as Peter and John did.</p></p>
<p id="n4400640"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400640">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>This holy place</i> is a reference to the temple.</p></p>
<p id="n4400641"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400641">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The law</i> refers to the law of Moses. It elaborates the nature of the blasphemy in v. 11. To speak against God’s law in Torah was to blaspheme God (Deut 28:15-19). On the Jewish view of false witnesses, see Exod 19:16-18; 20:16; <i>m. Sanhedrin</i> 3.6; 5.1-5. Stephen’s speech in Acts 7 may indicate why the temple was mentioned.</p></p>
<p id="n4400642"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400642">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “practices.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Will destroy this place and change the customs</i>. Stephen appears to view the temple as a less central place in light of Christ’s work, an important challenge to Jewish religion, since it was at this time a temple-centered state and religion. Unlike Acts 3-4, the issue here is more than Jesus and his resurrection. Now the impact of his resurrection and the temple’s centrality has also become an issue. The “falseness” of the charge may not be that the witnesses were lying, but that they falsely read the truth of Stephen’s remarks.</p></p>
<p id="n4400643"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400643">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And all.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400644"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400644">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Sanhedrin” (the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n4400645"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400645">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at him”; the referent (Stephen) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400646"><a href="file1068.xhtml#n4400646">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>His face was like the face of an angel</i>. This narrative description of Stephen’s <i>face</i> adds to the mood of the passage. He had the appearance of a supernatural, heavenly messenger.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
