<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 5</h2>
<p id="n450051"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n450051">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> Many interpreters see Rom 5:1 as beginning the second major division of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n450052"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n450052">2</a> <p><b>tc</b> A number of significant witnesses have the subjunctive <span class="greek">ἔχωμεν</span> (<span class="translit">echōmen</span>, “let us have”) instead of <span class="greek">ἔχομεν</span> (<span class="translit">echomen</span>, “we have”) in v. 1. Included in the subjunctive’s support are <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B* C D K L 33 81 630 1175 1739* <i>pm</i> lat bo. But the indicative is not without its supporters: <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> B<sup>2</sup> F G P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0220<sup>vid</sup> 104 365 1241 1505 1506 1739<sup>c</sup> 1881 2464 <i>pm</i>. If the problem were to be solved on an external basis only, the subjunctive would be preferred. Because of this, the “A” rating on behalf of the indicative in the UBS<sup>5</sup> appears overly confident. Nevertheless, the indicative is probably correct. First, the earliest witness to Rom 5:1 has the indicative (0220<sup>vid</sup>, third century). Second, the first set of correctors is sometimes, if not often, of equal importance with the original hand. Hence, <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> might be given equal value with <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*. Third, there is a good cross-section of witnesses for the indicative: Alexandrian (in 0220<sup>vid</sup>, probably <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> 1241 1506 1881 <i>al</i>), Western (in F G), and Byzantine (noted in NA<sup>28</sup> as <i>pm</i>). Thus, although the external evidence is strongly in favor of the subjunctive, the indicative is represented well enough that its ancestry could easily go back to the autograph. Turning to the internal evidence, the indicative gains much ground. (1) The variant may have been produced via an error of hearing (since <i>omicron</i> and <i>omega</i> were pronounced alike in ancient Greek). This, of course, does not indicate which reading was the initial text—just that an error of hearing may have produced one of them. In light of the indecisiveness of the transcriptional evidence, intrinsic evidence could play a much larger role. This is indeed the case here. (2) The indicative fits well with the overall argument of the book to this point. Up until now, Paul has been establishing the “indicatives of the faith.” There is only one imperative (used rhetorically) and only one hortatory subjunctive (and this in a quotation within a diatribe) up till this point, while from ch. 6 on there are sixty-one imperatives and seven hortatory subjunctives. Clearly, an exhortation would be out of place in ch. 5. (3) Paul presupposes that the audience has peace with God (via reconciliation) in 5:10. This seems to assume the indicative in v. 1. (4) As C. E. B. Cranfield notes, “it would surely be strange for Paul, in such a carefully argued writing as this, to exhort his readers to enjoy or to guard a peace which he has not yet explicitly shown to be possessed by them” (<i>Romans</i> [ICC], 1:257). (5) The notion that <span class="greek">εἰρήνην ἔχωμεν</span> (<span class="translit">eirēnēn echōmen</span>) can even naturally mean “enjoy peace” is problematic (<i>ExSyn</i> 464), yet those who embrace the subjunctive have to give the verb some such force. Thus, although the external evidence is stronger in support of the subjunctive, the internal evidence points to the indicative. Although a decision is difficult, <span class="greek">ἔχομεν</span> appears to be the authentic reading.</p></p>
<p id="n450053"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n450053">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ There is some dispute over whether <span class="greek">τῇ πίστει</span> is here or not. Several decent witnesses lack the words (B D F G 0220 sa Ambst) while they are found (with <span class="greek">ἐν</span> preceding the article in some) in other witnesses, some of which are very good (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> [+ <span class="greek">ἐν</span> in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup>; lacking in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*, omitted in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>c</sup>] A [also with <span class="greek">ἐν</span>] C <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1739 1881 lat). On balance, the shorter reading has stronger external witnesses. As well, (<span class="greek">ἐν</span>) <span class="greek">τῇ πίστει</span> strikes the reader as mildly redundant and certainly as a clarification. As such, it seems to be a motivated reading. It is thus best to delete the words from the text.</p></p>
<p id="n450054"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n450054">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “exult, boast.”</p></p>
<p id="n450055"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n450055">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n450056"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n450056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase <span class="greek">ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">hē agapē tou theou</span>, “the love of God”) could be interpreted as either an objective genitive (“our love for God”), subjective genitive (“God’s love for us”), or both (M. Zerwick’s “general” genitive [<i>Biblical Greek</i>, §§36-39]; D. B. Wallace’s “plenary” genitive [<i>ExSyn</i> 119-21]). The immediate context, which discusses what God has done for believers, favors a subjective genitive, but the fact that this love is poured out within the hearts of believers implies that it may be the source for believers’ love for God; consequently an objective genitive cannot be ruled out. It is possible that both these ideas are meant in the text and that this is a plenary genitive: “The love that comes from God and that produces our love for God has been poured out within our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us” (<i>ExSyn</i> 121).</p></p>
<p id="n450057"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n450057">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the OT background of the Spirit being <i>poured out</i>, see Isa 32:15; Joel 2:28-29.</p></p>
<p id="n450058"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n450058">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> Verse 7 forms something of a parenthetical comment in Paul’s argument.</p></p>
<p id="n450059"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n450059">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having now been declared righteous.” The participle <span class="greek">δικαιωθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">dikaiōthentes</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4500510"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or, according to BDF §219.3, “at the price of his blood.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500511"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the wrath,” referring to God’s wrath as v. 10 shows.</p></p>
<p id="n4500512"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4500513"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “exult, boast.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500514"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπους</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpous</span>) has been translated as a generic (“people”) since both men and women are clearly intended in this context. </p></p>
<p id="n4500515"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation of the phrase <span class="greek">ἐφ᾿ ᾧ</span> (<span class="translit">eph hō</span>) has been heavily debated. For a discussion of all the possibilities, see C. E. B. Cranfield, “On Some of the Problems in the Interpretation of Romans 5.12,” <i>SJT</i> 22 (1969): 324-41. Only a few of the major options can be mentioned here: (1) the phrase can be taken as a relative clause in which the pronoun refers to Adam, “death spread to all people <i>in whom</i> [Adam] all sinned.” (2) The phrase can be taken with consecutive (resultative) force, meaning “death spread to all people <i>with the result that</i> all sinned.” (3) Others take the phrase as causal in force: “death spread to all people <i>because</i> all sinned.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500516"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for before the law.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500517"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sin is not reckoned.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500518"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “pattern.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500519"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “disobeyed”; <i>Grk</i> “in the likeness of Adam’s transgression.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500520"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but not as the transgression, so also [is] the gracious gift.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500521"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500521">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here the <i>one man</i> refers to Adam (cf. 5:14).</p></p>
<p id="n4500522"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and not as through the one who sinned [is] the gift.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500523"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “transgression” is not in the Greek text at this point, but has been supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4500524"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Greek emphasizes the contrast between these two clauses more than can be easily expressed in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4500525"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “falls, trespasses,” the same word used in vv. 15, 17, 18, 20.</p></p>
<p id="n4500526"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500526">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here the <i>one man</i> refers to Adam (cf. 5:14).</p></p>
<p id="n4500527"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is a double connective here that cannot be easily preserved in English: “consequently therefore,” emphasizing the conclusion of what he has been arguing.</p></p>
<p id="n4500528"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “[it is] unto condemnation for all people.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500529"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπους</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpous</span>) has been translated as a generic (“people”) since both men and women are clearly intended in this context. </p></p>
<p id="n4500530"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> There are no verbs in the Greek text of v. 18, forcing translators to supply phrases like “<i>came through</i> one transgression,” “<i>resulted from</i> one transgression,” etc.</p></p>
<p id="n4500531"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500531">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>One transgression</i> refers to the sin of Adam in Gen 3:1-24.</p></p>
<p id="n4500532"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500532">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>one righteous act</i> refers to Jesus’ death on the cross.</p></p>
<p id="n4500533"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “righteousness of life.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500534"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500534">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here the <i>one man</i> refers to Adam (cf. 5:14).</p></p>
<p id="n4500535"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the many.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500536"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500536">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>One man</i> refers here to Jesus Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n4500537"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the many.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500538"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “slipped in.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500539"><a href="file1096.xhtml#n4500539">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “trespass.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
