<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 15</h2>
<p id="n400151"><a href="file984.xhtml#n400151">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n400152"><a href="file984.xhtml#n400152">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n400154"><a href="file984.xhtml#n400154">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb so that its telic (i.e., final or conclusive) force can be more easily detected: The Pharisees and legal experts came to Jesus in order to speak with him.</p></p>
<p id="n400155"><a href="file984.xhtml#n400155">5</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Although most witnesses read the genitive plural pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτῶν</span> (<span class="translit">autōn</span>, “their”), it may have been motivated by clarification (as it is in the translation above). Several other authorities do not have the pronoun, however (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B <span class="greek">Δ</span> 073 ƒ<sup>1</sup> 579 700 892 1424 f g<sup>1</sup>); the lack of an unintentional oversight as the reason for omission strengthens their combined testimony in this shorter reading. NA<sup>28</sup> has the pronoun in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n400156"><a href="file984.xhtml#n400156">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “when they eat bread.”</p></p>
<p id="n400157"><a href="file984.xhtml#n400157">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But answering, he said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n400158"><a href="file984.xhtml#n400158">8</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*<sup>,2b</sup> C L N W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 0106 33 565 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have an expanded introduction here; instead of “For God said,” they read “For God commanded, saying” (<span class="greek">ὁ γὰρ θεὸς ἐνετείλατο λέγων</span>, <span class="translit">ho gar theos eneteilato legōn</span>). But such expansions are generally motivated readings; in this case, most likely it was due to the wording of the previous verse (“the commandment of God”) that caused early scribes to add to the text. Although it is possible that other witnesses reduced the text to the simple <span class="greek">εἶπεν</span> (<span class="translit">eipen</span>, “[God] said”) because of perceived redundancy with the statement in v. 3, such is unlikely in light of the great variety and age of these authorities (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2a</sup> B D <span class="greek">Θ</span> 073 ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 579 700 892 lat co, as well as other versions and fathers).</p></p>
<p id="n400159"><a href="file984.xhtml#n400159">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 20:12; Deut 5:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4001510"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001510">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 21:17; Lev 20:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4001511"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is a gift,” that is, something dedicated to God.</p></p>
<p id="n4001512"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001512">12</a> <p><b>tc</b> The logic of v. 5 would seem to demand that both father and mother are in view in v. 6. Indeed, the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (C L N W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> 0106 ƒ<sup>1</sup> 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have “or his mother” (<span class="greek">ἢ τὴν μητέρα αὐτοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">ē tēn mētera autou</span>) after “honor his father” here. However, there are significant witnesses that have variations on this theme (<span class="greek">καὶ τὴν μητέρα αὐτοῦ</span> [<span class="translit">kai tēn mētera autou</span>, “and his mother”] in <span class="greek">Φ</span> 565 1241 bo and <span class="greek">ἢ τὴν μητέρα</span> [“or mother”] in 073 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 579 700 892), which is usually an indication of a predictable addition to the text rather than an authentic reading. Further, the shorter reading (without any mention of “mother”) is found in early and significant witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D a e sy<sup>c</sup> sa). Although it is possible that the shorter reading came about accidentally (due to the repetition of—<span class="greek">ερα</span> <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span>), the evidence more strongly suggests that the longer readings were intentional scribal alterations.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he will never honor his father.” Here Jesus is quoting the Pharisees, whose intent is to release the person who is giving his possessions to God from the family obligation of caring for his parents. The verb in this phrase is future tense, and it is negated with <span class="greek">οὐ μή</span> (<span class="translit">ou mē</span>), the strongest negation possible in Greek. A literal translation of the phrase does not capture the intended sense of the statement; it would actually make the Pharisees sound as if they agreed with Jesus. Instead, a more interpretive translation has been used to focus upon the release from family obligations that the Pharisees allowed in these circumstances.</p><p><b>sn</b> Here Jesus refers to something that has been set aside as a gift to be given to God at some later date, but which is still in the possession of the owner. According to contemporary Jewish tradition, the person who made this claim was absolved from responsibility to support or assist his parents, a clear violation of the Mosaic law to <i>honor</i> one’s parents (v. 4).</p></p>
<p id="n4001513"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “heart” is a collective singular in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n4001514"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001514">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 29:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4001515"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And calling the crowd, he said to them.” The participle <span class="greek">προσκαλεσάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">proskalesamenos</span>) has been translated as attendant circumstance. The emphasis here is upon Jesus’ speaking to the crowd.</p></p>
<p id="n4001516"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but what.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001517"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001517">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4001518"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, he said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001519"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001519">19</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, some of which are significant, read “They are blind guides of the blind” (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2a</sup> C L N W Z <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat; SBL). The omission of “of the blind” is read by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*<sup>,2b</sup> B D 0237 Epiph. There is a distinct possibility of omission due to homoioarcton in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*; this manuscript has a word order variation which puts the word <span class="greek">τυφλοί</span> (<span class="translit">tuphloi</span>, “blind”) right before the word <span class="greek">τυφλῶν</span> (<span class="translit">tuphlōn</span>, “of the blind”). This does not explain the shorter reading, however, in the other witnesses, of which B and D are quite weighty. Internal considerations suggest that the shorter reading is autographic: “of the blind” was likely added by scribes to balance this phrase with Jesus’ following statement about the blind leading the blind, which clearly has two groups in view. A decision is difficult, but internal considerations here along with the strength of the witnesses argue that the shorter reading is more likely original. NA<sup>28</sup> places <span class="greek">τυφλῶν</span> in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4001520"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “If blind leads blind.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001521"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, Peter said to him.” This construction is somewhat redundant in English and has been simplified in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n4001522"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001523"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “into the latrine.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001524"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but to eat with unwashed hands does not defile a person.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001527"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold a Canaanite.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4001528"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> The participle <span class="greek">ἐξελθοῦσα</span> (<span class="translit">exelthousa</span>) is here translated as a finite verb. The emphasis is upon her crying out to Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4001529"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “cried out, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγουσα</span> (<span class="translit">legousa</span>) is redundant here in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001530"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001531"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001531">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “asked him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant here in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001532"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, he said.” The construction in Greek is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the disciples’ request.</p></p>
<p id="n4001533"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> In this context the verb <span class="greek">προσκυνέω</span> (<span class="translit">proskuneō</span>), which often describes worship, probably means simply bowing down to the ground in an act of reverence or supplication (see L&amp;N 17.21).</p></p>
<p id="n4001534"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001534">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “she bowed down to him, saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001535"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, he said, ‘It is not right.’” The introductory phrase “answering, he said” has been simplified and placed at the end of the English sentence for stylistic reasons. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001536"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001536">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “lap dogs, house dogs,” as opposed to dogs on the street. The diminutive form originally referred to puppies or little dogs, then to house pets. In some Hellenistic uses <span class="greek">κυνάριον</span> (<span class="translit">kunarion</span>) simply means “dog.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The term <i>dogs</i> does not refer to wild dogs (scavenging animals roaming around the countryside) in this context, but to small dogs taken in as house pets. It is thus not a derogatory term per se, but is instead intended by Jesus to indicate the privileged position of the Jews (especially his disciples) as the initial recipients of Jesus’ ministry. The woman’s response of faith and her willingness to accept whatever Jesus would offer pleased him to such an extent that he granted her request.</p></p>
<p id="n4001537"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, he said.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> (<span class="translit">apokritheis</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001538"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “she said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001539"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001539">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then answering, Jesus said to her.” This expression has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4001540"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001540">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Woman</i> was a polite form of address (see BDAG 208-9 s.v. <span class="greek">γυνή</span> <span class="greek">1</span>), similar to “Madam” or “Ma’am” used in English in different regions.</p></p>
<p id="n4001541"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001541">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001542"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001542">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001543"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “was giving them to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowd.” </p></p>
<p id="n4001544"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001544">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001545"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001545">45</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Although most witnesses (B C L N W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> f sy<sup>s,p,h</sup> mae) read “women and children” instead of “children and women,” this is likely a harmonization to Matt 14:21. A decision is difficult here, but since “children and women” is found in early and geographically widespread witnesses (e.g., <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> D [<span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup>] 579 lat sy<sup>c</sup> sa bo), and has more compelling internal arguments on its side, it is likely the reading of the initial text. NA<sup>28</sup>, however, agrees with the majority of witnesses.</p></p>
<p id="n4001546"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001546">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And those eating were 4,000 men, apart from children and women.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001547"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001547">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note at Matt 4:21 for a description of the first-century fishing boat discovered in 1986 near Tiberias on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n4001548"><a href="file984.xhtml#n4001548">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Magadan</i> was a place along the Sea of Galilee, the exact location of which is uncertain.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
