<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Corinthians 7</h2>
<p id="n470071"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n470071">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “purify ourselves.”</p></p>
<p id="n470072"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n470072">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from every defilement of the flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n470073"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n470073">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “accomplishing.” The participle has been translated as a finite verb due to considerations of contemporary English style, and “thus” has been supplied to indicate that it represents a result of the previous cleansing.</p></p>
<p id="n470074"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n470074">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the fear of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n470075"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n470075">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “in your hearts” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n470076"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n470076">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> “We have ruined no one” may refer to financial loss (“we have caused no one to suffer financial loss”) but it may also refer to the undermining of faith (“we have corrupted no one’s faith,”). Both options are mentioned in L&amp;N 20.23.</p></p>
<p id="n470077"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n470077">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “we have taken advantage of no one.”</p></p>
<p id="n470078"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n470078">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> See 2 Cor 1:4-7.</p></p>
<p id="n470079"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n470079">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “with you” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4700710"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700710">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “great is my boasting.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700711"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700711">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “comfort.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700712"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700712">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I am overflowing with joy in all our suffering”; the words “in the midst of” are not in the Greek text but are supplied to clarify that Paul is not rejoicing in the suffering itself, but in his relationship with the Corinthians in the midst of all his suffering.</p></p>
<p id="n4700713"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700713">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “our flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700714"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700714">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “comforts,” “consoles.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700715"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700715">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “comforted,” “consoled.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700716"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700716">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of this Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the phrase “We were encouraged.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700717"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700717">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “comfort,” “consolation.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700718"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700718">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the encouragement with which he was encouraged by you.” The passive construction was translated as an active one in keeping with contemporary English style, and the repeated word “encouraged” was replaced in the translation by “gave” to avoid redundancy in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4700719"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700719">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “your grieving,” “your deep sorrow.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700720"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “your zeal.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700721"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700721">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if I grieved you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700722"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700722">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>My letter</i>. Paul is referring to the “severe” letter mentioned in 2 Cor 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4700723"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700723">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I do not regret”; direct objects in Greek must often be supplied from the context. Here one could simply supply “it,” but since Paul is referring to the effects of his previous letter, clarity is improved if “having written it” is supplied.</p></p>
<p id="n4700724"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700724">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I did regret”; the direct object “it” must be supplied from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4700725"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700725">25</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46c</sup> B D* it sa) lack <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>, “for”), while the majority of witnesses have it (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C D<sup>1</sup> F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0243 33 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy bo). Even though <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46*</sup> omits <span class="greek">γάρ</span>, it has the same sense (viz., a subordinate clause) because it reads the participle <span class="greek">βλέπων</span> (<span class="translit">blepōn</span>, “seeing”; the Vulgate does the same). A decision is difficult because although the overwhelming external evidence is on the side of the conjunction, the lack of <span class="greek">γάρ</span> is a significantly harder reading, for the whole clause is something of an anacoluthon. Without the conjunction, the sentence reads more harshly. This would fit with Paul’s “vehemence of spirit” (A. T. Robertson, <i>A Grammar of the Greek New Testament</i>, 435) that is found especially in 2 Corinthians and Galatians. However, the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that omit the conjunction are prone to such tendencies at times. In this instance, the conjunction should probably stand.</p></p>
<p id="n4700726"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700726">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my letter grieved you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700727"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700727">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “were grieved” (so also twice later in the verse).</p></p>
<p id="n4700728"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700728">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “corresponding to God,” that is, corresponding to God’s will (<span class="greek">κατὰ θεόν</span>, <span class="translit">kata theon</span>). The same phrase occurs in vv. 10 and 11.</p></p>
<p id="n4700729"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700729">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that you did not suffer loss.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700730"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700730">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this very thing, to be grieved.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700731"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700731">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “of yourselves” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4700732"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700732">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>What indignation</i> refers to the Corinthians’ indignation at the offender.</p></p>
<p id="n4700733"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700733">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “what zeal.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700734"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700734">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, <i>punishment</i> for the offender.</p></p>
<p id="n4700735"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700735">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but in order that your eagerness on our behalf might be revealed to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700736"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700736">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “all of you have put his mind at ease.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700737"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700737">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I have not been put to shame”; the words “by you” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4700738"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700738">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “just as we spoke everything to you in truth.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700739"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700739">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “about you” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4700740"><a href="file1132.xhtml#n4700740">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is all the more.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
