<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Ephesians 4</h2>
<p id="n490041"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n490041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “prisoner in the Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n490042"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n490042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “walk.” The verb “walk” in the NT letters refers to the conduct of one’s life, not to physical walking.</p></p>
<p id="n490043"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n490043">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>With which you have been called</i>. The calling refers to the Holy Spirit’s prompting that caused them to believe. The author is thus urging his readers to live a life that conforms to their saved status before God.</p></p>
<p id="n490044"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n490044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “meekness.” The word is often used in Hellenistic Greek of the merciful execution of justice on behalf of those who have no voice by those who are in a position of authority (Matt 11:29; 21:5). </p></p>
<p id="n490045"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n490045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bearing with” (NRSV, NIV); or “forbearing” (KJV, ASV).</p></p>
<p id="n490046"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n490046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he led captive captivity.” </p></p>
<p id="n490047"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n490047">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation which is perhaps ultimately derived from Ps 68:18. However, the wording here differs from that of Ps 68 in both the Hebrew text and the LXX in a few places, the most significant of which is reading “gave gifts to” in place of “received gifts from” as in HT and LXX. It has sometimes been suggested that the author of Ephesians modified the text he was citing in order to better support what he wanted to say here. Such modifications are sometimes found in rabbinic exegesis from this and later periods, but it is also possible that the author was simply citing a variant of Ps 68 known to him but which has not survived outside its quotation here (W. H. Harris, <i>The Descent of Christ</i> [AGJU 32], 104). Another possibility is that the words here, which strongly resemble Ps 68:19 HT and LXX (68:18 ET), are actually part of an early Christian hymn quoted by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n490048"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n490048">8</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> B C<sup>3</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1505 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) read <span class="greek">πρῶτον</span> (<span class="translit">prōton</span>, “first”) here in conjunction with this verb: “he first descended.” The shorter reading, which lacks <span class="greek">πρῶτον</span>, should be considered autographic on the basis of both external and internal evidence: It has strong external support from the Alexandrian and Western witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A C* D F G I<sup>vid</sup> 082 6 33 81 1739 1881 <i>it</i>); internally, the inclusion of <span class="greek">πρῶτον</span> is most likely an addition to clarify the sense of the passage.</p></p>
<p id="n490049"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n490049">9</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Western text (D* F G it) lacks the plural noun <span class="greek">μέρη</span> (<span class="translit">merē</span>, “regions”); the shorter reading cannot be dismissed out of hand since it is also supported by <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> (which often has strong affinities, however, with the Western witnesses). The inclusion of the word has strong external support from significant, early <span class="smcaps">mss</span> as well as the majority of Byzantine cursives (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C D<sup>2</sup> I <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span>). Certain scribes may have deleted the word, thinking it superfluous; in addition, if the shorter reading were original one would expect to see at least a little variation in clarifying additions to the text. For these reasons the inclusion of <span class="greek">μέρη</span> should be regarded as original.</p></p>
<p id="n4900410"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the lower parts of the earth.” This phrase has been variously interpreted: (1) The traditional view understands it as a reference to the underworld (hell), where Jesus is thought to have descended in the three days between his death and resurrection. In this case, “of the earth” would be a partitive genitive. (2) A second option is to translate the phrase “of the earth” as a genitive of apposition: “to the lower parts, namely, the earth” (as in the present translation). Many recent scholars hold this view and argue that it is a reference to the incarnation. (3) A third option, which also sees the phrase “of the earth” as a genitive of apposition, is that the descent in the passage occurs <i>after</i> the ascent rather than before it, and refers to the descent of the Spirit at Pentecost (cf. Acts 4:11-16). Support for this latter view is found in the intertestamental and rabbinic use of Ps 68:18 (quoted in v. 8), which is consistently and solely interpreted as a reference to Moses’ ascent of Mt. Sinai to “capture” the words of the law. The probability, therefore, is that the comments here in v. 9 reflect a polemic against the interpretation of Ps 68:18 in certain circles as a reference to Moses. See W. H. Harris, <i>The Descent of Christ</i> (AGJU 32), 46-54; 171-204.</p></p>
<p id="n4900411"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek text lays specific emphasis on “He” through the use of the intensive pronoun, <span class="greek">αὐτός</span> (<span class="translit">autos</span>). This is reflected in the English translation through the use of “the very one.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900412"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The emphasis on Christ is continued through the use of the intensive pronoun, <span class="greek">αὐτός</span> (<span class="translit">autos</span>), and is rendered in English as “he himself” as this seems to lay emphasis on the “he.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900413"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900413">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> Some interpreters have understood the phrase <i>pastors and teachers</i> to refer to one and the same group. This would mean that all pastors are teachers and that all teachers are pastors. This position is often taken because it is recognized that both nouns (i.e., <i>pastors</i> and <i>teachers</i>) are governed by one article in Greek. But because the nouns are plural, it is extremely unlikely that they refer to the same group, but only that the author is linking them closely together. It is better to regard the pastors as a subset of teachers. In other words, all pastors are teachers, but not all teachers are pastors. See <i>ExSyn</i> 284.</p></p>
<p id="n4900414"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the translation of <span class="greek">πρὸς τὸν καταρτισμὸν τῶν ἁγίων</span> (<span class="translit">pros ton katartismon tōn hagiōn</span>) as “to equip the saints” see BDAG 526 s.v. <span class="greek">καταρτισμός</span>. In this case the genitive is taken as objective and the direct object of the verbal idea implied in <span class="greek">καταρτισμός</span> (<span class="translit">katartismos</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4900415"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The <span class="greek">εἰς</span> (<span class="translit">eis</span>) clause is taken as epexegetical to the previous <span class="greek">εἰς</span> clause, namely, <span class="greek">εἰς ἔργον διακονίας</span> (<span class="translit">eis ergon diakonias</span>). </p></p>
<p id="n4900416"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “attaining to” were supplied in the translation to pick up the <span class="greek">καταντήσωμεν</span> (<span class="translit">katantēsōmen</span>) mentioned earlier in the sentence and the <span class="greek">εἰς</span> (<span class="translit">eis</span>) which heads up this clause. </p></p>
<p id="n4900417"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.” On this translation of <span class="greek">ἡλικία</span> (<span class="translit">hēlikia</span>, “stature”) see BDAG 436 s.v. 3. </p></p>
<p id="n4900418"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4900419"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> While the sense of the passage is clear enough, translation in English is somewhat difficult. The Greek says: “by the trickery of men, by craftiness with the scheme of deceit.” The point is that the author is concerned about Christians growing into maturity. He is fearful that certain kinds of very cunning people, who are skilled at deceitful scheming, should come in and teach false doctrines which would in turn stunt the growth of the believers.</p></p>
<p id="n4900420"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The meaning of the participle <span class="greek">ἀληθεύοντες</span> (<span class="translit">alētheuontes</span>; from the verb <span class="greek">ἀληθεύω</span> [<span class="translit">alētheuō</span>]) is debated. In classical times the verb could mean “to speak the truth,” or “to be true, to prove true.” In the LXX it appears five times (Gen 20:16; 42:16; Prov 21:3; Isa 44:26; Sir 34:4) and translates four different Hebrew words; there it is an ethical term used of proving or being true, not with the idea of speaking the truth. In the NT the only other place the verb appears is in Gal 4:16 where it means “to speak the truth.” However, in Ephesians the concept of “being truthful” is the best sense of the word. In contrast to the preceding verse, where there are three prepositional phrases to denote falsehood and deceit, the present word speaks of being real or truthful in both conduct and speech. Their deceit was not only in their words but also in their conduct. In other words, the believers’ conduct should be transparent, revealing the real state of affairs, as opposed to hiding or suppressing the truth through cunning and deceit. See H. W. Hoehner, <i>Ephesians</i>, 564-65, and R. Bultmann, <i>TDNT</i> 1:251.</p></p>
<p id="n4900421"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek participle <span class="greek">συμβιβαζόμενον</span> (<span class="translit">sumbibazomenon</span>) translated “held together” also has in different contexts, the idea of teaching implied in it. </p></p>
<p id="n4900422"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “joint of supply.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900423"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the translation of <span class="greek">μαρτύρομαι</span> (<span class="translit">marturomai</span>) as “insist” see BDAG 619 s.v. 2. </p></p>
<p id="n4900424"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the translation of <span class="greek">ματαιότης</span> (<span class="translit">mataiotēs</span>) as “futility” see BDAG 621 s.v. </p></p>
<p id="n4900425"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “thoughts,” “mind.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900426"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> In the Greek text this clause is actually subordinate to <span class="greek">περιπατεῖ</span> (<span class="translit">peripatei</span>) in v. 17. It was broken up in the English translation so as to avoid an unnecessarily long and cumbersome statement.</p></p>
<p id="n4900427"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900427">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Greediness</i> refers to an increasing desire for more and more. The point is that sinful passions and desires are never satisfied. </p></p>
<p id="n4900428"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900428">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> An alternative rendering for the infinitives in vv. 22-24 (“to lay aside…to be renewed…to put on”) is “that you have laid aside…that you are being renewed…that you have put on.” The three infinitives of vv. 22 (<span class="greek">ἀποθέσθαι</span>, <span class="translit">apothesthai</span>), 23 (<span class="greek">ἀνανεοῦσθαι</span>, <span class="translit">ananeousthai</span>), and 24 (<span class="greek">ἐνδύσασθαι</span>, <span class="translit">endusasthai</span>), form part of an indirect discourse clause; they constitute the teaching given to the believers addressed in the letter. The problem in translation is that one cannot be absolutely certain whether they go back to indicatives in the original statement (i.e., “you have put off”) or imperatives (i.e., “put off!”). Every other occurrence of an aorist infinitive in indirect discourse in the NT goes back to an imperative, but in all of these examples the indirect discourse is introduced by a verb that implies a command. The verb <span class="greek">διδάσκω</span> (<span class="translit">didaskō</span>) in the <i>corpus Paulinum</i> may be used to relate the indicatives of the faith as well as the imperatives. This translation implies that the infinitives go back to imperatives, though the alternate view that they refer back to indicatives is also a plausible interpretation. For further discussion, see <i>ExSyn</i> 605.</p></p>
<p id="n4900429"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900429">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in God’s likeness.” <i>Grk</i> “according to God.” The preposition <span class="greek">κατά</span> used here denotes a measure of similarity or equality (BDAG 513 s.v. B.5.b.<span class="greek">α</span>). </p></p>
<p id="n4900430"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in righteousness and holiness which is based on truth” or “originated from truth.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900431"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900431">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Zech 8:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4900432"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900432">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 4:4. Although several translations render the phrase <i>Be angry and do not sin</i> as “If you are angry, do not sin” such is unlikely on a grammatical, lexical, and historical level (see D. B. Wallace, “<span class="greek">᾿Οργίζεσθε</span> in Ephesians 4:26: Command or Condition?” <i>CTR</i> 3 [1989]: 352-72). The idea of vv. 26-27 is as follows: Christians are to exercise a righteous indignation over sin in the midst of the believing community (v. 26a; note that v. 25 is restricting the discussion to those in the body of Christ). When other believers sin, such people should be gently and quickly confronted (v. 26b), for if the body of Christ does not address sin in its midst, the devil gains a foothold (v. 27). “Entirely opposite of the ‘introspective conscience’ view, this text seems to be a shorthand expression for church discipline, suggesting that there is a biblical warrant for <span class="greek">δικαία ὀργή</span> [<span class="translit">dikaia orgē</span>] (as the Greeks put it)—righteous indignation” (<i>ExSyn</i> 492).</p></p>
<p id="n4900433"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900433">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word <span class="greek">παροργισμός</span> (<span class="translit">parorgismos</span>), typically translated “anger” in most versions is used almost exclusively of the <i>source</i> of anger rather than the results in Greek literature (thus, it refers to an external cause or provocation rather than an internal reaction). The notion of “cause of your anger” is both lexically and historically justified. The apparently proverbial nature of the statement (“Do not let the sun go down on the cause of your anger”) finds several remarkable parallels in <i>Pss. Sol</i>. 8:8-9: “(8) God laid bare their sins in the full light of day; All the earth came to know the righteous judgments of God. (9) In secret places underground their iniquities (were committed) to provoke (Him) to anger” (R. H. Charles’ translation). Not only is <span class="greek">παροργισμός</span> used, but righteous indignation against God’s own people and the laying bare of their sins in broad daylight are also seen. </p></p>
<p id="n4900434"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900434">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but if something good for the building up of the need.” The final genitive <span class="greek">τῆς χρείας</span> (<span class="translit">tēs chreias</span>) may refer to “the need of the moment” or it may refer to the need of a particular person or group of people as the next phrase “give grace to those who hear” indicates. </p></p>
<p id="n4900435"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900435">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with all malice.” This final phrase provides a cumulative point of focus for this list and presents a summary vice encompassing all the others. The translation attempts to make this nuance clear.</p></p>
<p id="n4900436"><a href="file1150.xhtml#n4900436">36</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Although most witnesses have either <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>; <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>49</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1505 1739<sup>mg</sup> 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat) or <span class="greek">οὖν</span> (<span class="translit">oun</span>; D* F G 1175) here, a few significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> lack a conjunction (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B 0278 6 1739* 1881). If either conjunction were originally in the text, it is difficult to explain how the asyndetic construction could have arisen (although the dropping of <span class="greek">δέ</span> could have occurred via homoioteleuton). Further, although Hellenistic Greek rarely joined sentences without a conjunction, such does occur in the <i>corpus Paulinum</i> on occasion, especially to underscore a somber point. “Instead” has been supplied in the translation because of stylistic requirements, not textual basis. NA<sup>28</sup> places <span class="greek">δέ</span> in brackets, indicating some doubt as to its authenticity.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
