<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Timothy 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Timothy<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Instructions about Specific Groups</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> Do not address an older man harshly<sup><a id="n540051" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n540051">1</a></sup> but appeal to him as a father. Speak to younger men as brothers,<sup><a id="n540052" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n540052">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:2</span> older women as mothers, and younger women as sisters—with complete purity. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:3</span> Honor<sup><a id="n540053" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n540053">3</a></sup> widows who are truly in need.<sup><a id="n540054" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n540054">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:4</span> But if a widow has children or grandchildren, they should first learn to fulfill their duty<sup><a id="n540055" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n540055">5</a></sup> toward their own household and so repay their parents what is owed them.<sup><a id="n540056" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n540056">6</a></sup> For this is what pleases God.<sup><a id="n540057" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n540057">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:5</span> But the widow who is truly in need, and completely on her own,<sup><a id="n540058" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n540058">8</a></sup> has set her hope on God and continues in her pleas and prayers night and day. <span class="verse">5:6</span> But the one who lives for pleasure is dead even<sup><a id="n540059" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n540059">9</a></sup> while she lives. <span class="verse">5:7</span> Reinforce<sup><a id="n5400510" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400510">10</a></sup> these commands,<sup><a id="n5400511" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400511">11</a></sup> so that they will be beyond reproach. <span class="verse">5:8</span> But if someone does not provide for his own,<sup><a id="n5400512" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400512">12</a></sup> especially his own family, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:9</span> No widow should be put on the list<sup><a id="n5400513" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400513">13</a></sup> unless<sup><a id="n5400514" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400514">14</a></sup> she is at least sixty years old, was the wife of one husband,<sup><a id="n5400515" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400515">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:10</span> and has a reputation for good works: as one who has raised children,<sup><a id="n5400516" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400516">16</a></sup> practiced hospitality, washed the feet of the saints, helped those in distress—as one who has exhibited all kinds of good works.<sup><a id="n5400517" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400517">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:11</span> But do not accept younger widows on the list,<sup><a id="n5400518" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400518">18</a></sup> because their passions may lead them away from Christ<sup><a id="n5400519" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400519">19</a></sup> and they will desire to marry, <span class="verse">5:12</span> and so incur judgment for breaking their former pledge.<sup><a id="n5400520" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400520">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:13</span> And besides that, going around<sup><a id="n5400521" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400521">21</a></sup> from house to house they learn to be lazy,<sup><a id="n5400522" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400522">22</a></sup> and they are not only lazy, but also gossips and busybodies, talking about things they should not.<sup><a id="n5400523" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400523">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:14</span> So I want younger women to marry, raise children, and manage a household, in order to give the adversary no opportunity to vilify us.<sup><a id="n5400524" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400524">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:15</span> For some have already wandered away to follow Satan.<sup><a id="n5400525" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400525">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:16</span> If a believing woman<sup><a id="n5400526" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400526">26</a></sup> has widows in her family,<sup><a id="n5400527" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400527">27</a></sup> let her help them. The church should not be burdened, so that it may help the widows who are truly in need.<sup><a id="n5400528" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400528">28</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:17</span> Elders who provide effective leadership<sup><a id="n5400529" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400529">29</a></sup> must be counted worthy<sup><a id="n5400530" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400530">30</a></sup> of double honor,<sup><a id="n5400531" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400531">31</a></sup> especially those who work hard in speaking<sup><a id="n5400532" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400532">32</a></sup> and teaching. <span class="verse">5:18</span> For the scripture says, “<b><i>Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain</i></b>,”<sup><a id="n5400533" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400533">33</a></sup> and, “The worker deserves his pay.”<sup><a id="n5400534" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400534">34</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:19</span> Do not accept an accusation against an elder unless it can be confirmed <i>by two or three witnesses</i>.<sup><a id="n5400535" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400535">35</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:20</span> Those guilty of sin<sup><a id="n5400536" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400536">36</a></sup> must be rebuked<sup><a id="n5400537" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400537">37</a></sup> before all,<sup><a id="n5400538" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400538">38</a></sup> as a warning to the rest.<sup><a id="n5400539" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400539">39</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:21</span> Before God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels, I solemnly charge you to carry out these commands without prejudice or favoritism of any kind.<sup><a id="n5400540" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400540">40</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:22</span> Do not lay hands on anyone<sup><a id="n5400541" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400541">41</a></sup> hastily and so identify with the sins of others.<sup><a id="n5400542" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400542">42</a></sup> Keep yourself pure. <span class="verse">5:23</span> (Stop drinking just water, but use a little wine for your digestion<sup><a id="n5400543" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400543">43</a></sup> and your frequent illnesses.)<sup><a id="n5400544" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400544">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:24</span> The sins of some people are obvious, going before them into judgment, but for others, they show up later.<sup><a id="n5400545" href="file1178_notes.xhtml#n5400545">45</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:25</span> Similarly good works are also obvious, and the ones that are not cannot remain hidden. </p>

</body>
</html>