<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Hebrews 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Therefore we must progress beyond<sup><a id="n580061" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n580061">1</a></sup> the elementary<sup><a id="n580062" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n580062">2</a></sup> instructions about Christ<sup><a id="n580063" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n580063">3</a></sup> and move on<sup><a id="n580064" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n580064">4</a></sup> to maturity, not laying this foundation again: repentance from dead works<sup><a id="n580065" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n580065">5</a></sup> and faith in God, <span class="verse">6:2</span> teaching about ritual washings,<sup><a id="n580066" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n580066">6</a></sup> laying on of hands, resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment. <span class="verse">6:3</span> And this is what we intend to do,<sup><a id="n580067" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n580067">7</a></sup> if God permits. <span class="verse">6:4</span> For it is impossible in the case of those who have once been enlightened, tasted the heavenly gift, become partakers of the Holy Spirit, <span class="verse">6:5</span> tasted the good word of God and the miracles of the coming age, <span class="verse">6:6</span> and then have committed apostasy,<sup><a id="n580068" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n580068">8</a></sup> to renew them again to repentance, since<sup><a id="n580069" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n580069">9</a></sup> they are crucifying the Son of God for themselves all over again<sup><a id="n5800610" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800610">10</a></sup> and holding him up to contempt. <span class="verse">6:7</span> For the ground that has soaked up the rain that frequently falls on<sup><a id="n5800611" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800611">11</a></sup> it and yields useful vegetation for those who tend it receives a blessing from God. <span class="verse">6:8</span> But if it produces thorns and thistles, it is useless and about to be cursed;<sup><a id="n5800612" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800612">12</a></sup> its fate is to be burned. <span class="verse">6:9</span> But in your case, dear friends, even though we speak like this, we are convinced of better things relating to salvation. <span class="verse">6:10</span> For God is not unjust so as to forget your work and the love you have demonstrated for his name, in having served and continuing to serve the saints. <span class="verse">6:11</span> But we passionately want each of you to demonstrate the same eagerness for the fulfillment of your hope until the end, <span class="verse">6:12</span> so that you may not be sluggish,<sup><a id="n5800613" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800613">13</a></sup> but imitators of those who through faith and perseverance inherit the promises. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:13</span> Now when God made his promise to Abraham, since he could swear by no one greater, he swore by himself, <span class="verse">6:14</span> saying, “<b><i>Surely I will bless you greatly and multiply your descendants abundantly</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n5800614" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800614">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:15</span> And so by persevering, Abraham<sup><a id="n5800615" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800615">15</a></sup> inherited the promise. <span class="verse">6:16</span> For people<sup><a id="n5800616" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800616">16</a></sup> swear by something greater than themselves,<sup><a id="n5800617" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800617">17</a></sup> and the oath serves as a confirmation to end all dispute.<sup><a id="n5800618" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800618">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:17</span> In the same way<sup><a id="n5800619" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800619">19</a></sup> God wanted to demonstrate more clearly to the heirs of the promise that his purpose was unchangeable,<sup><a id="n5800620" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800620">20</a></sup> and so he intervened with an oath, <span class="verse">6:18</span> so that we who have found refuge in him<sup><a id="n5800621" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800621">21</a></sup> may find strong encouragement to hold fast to the hope set before us through two unchangeable things, since it is impossible for God to lie. <span class="verse">6:19</span> We have this hope as an anchor for the soul, sure and steadfast, which reaches inside behind the curtain,<sup><a id="n5800622" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800622">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:20</span> where Jesus our forerunner entered on our behalf, since he became <b><i>a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek</i></b>.<sup><a id="n5800623" href="file1197_notes.xhtml#n5800623">23</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>