<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Hebrews 10</h2>
<p id="n580101"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n580101">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those who approach.”</p></p>
<p id="n580102"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n580102">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the worshipers, having been purified once for all, would have.”</p></p>
<p id="n580103"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n580103">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in them”; the referent (those sacrifices) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n580104"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n580104">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold,” but this construction often means “here is/there is” (cf. BDAG 468 s.v. <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n580105"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n580105">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 40:6-8 (LXX). The phrase <i>a body you prepared for me</i> (in v. 5) is apparently an interpretive expansion of the HT reading “ears you have dug out for me.”</p></p>
<p id="n580106"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n580106">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> Various phrases from the quotation of Ps 40:6 in Heb 10:5-6 are repeated in Heb 10:8.</p></p>
<p id="n580107"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n580107">7</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially the later ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> 0278<sup>vid</sup> 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), have <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span> (<span class="translit">ho theos</span>, “God”) at this point, while most of the earliest and best witnesses lack such an explicit addressee (so <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A C D K P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1881 2464 <i>al</i>). The longer reading is apparently motivated in part by the wording of Ps 40:8 (39:9 LXX) and by the word order of this same verse as quoted in Heb 10:7. </p></p>
<p id="n580108"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n580108">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “abolishes.”</p></p>
<p id="n580109"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n580109">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by which will.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5801010"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801010">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “daily,” “every day.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801011"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801011">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one.” This pronoun refers to Jesus, but “this priest” was used in the translation to make the contrast between the Jewish priests in v. 11 and Jesus as a priest clearer in English.</p></p>
<p id="n5801012"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801012">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 110:1.</p></p>
<p id="n5801013"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801013">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from then on waiting.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801014"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801014">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 110:1.</p></p>
<p id="n5801015"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801015">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “after having said,” emphasizing the present impact of this utterance. </p></p>
<p id="n5801016"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801016">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “putting…I will inscribe.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801017"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801017">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Jer 31:33.</p></p>
<p id="n5801018"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801018">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801019"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801019">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Jer 31:34.</p></p>
<p id="n5801020"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801020">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n5801021"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801021">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that he inaugurated for us as a fresh and living way,” referring to the entrance mentioned in v. 19.</p></p>
<p id="n5801022"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801022">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Through his flesh</i>. In a bold shift the writer changes from a spatial phrase (Christ opened the way <i>through the curtain</i> into the inner sanctuary) to an instrumental phrase (he did this <i>through</i> [by means of] <i>his flesh</i> in his sacrifice of himself), associating the two in an allusion to the splitting of the curtain in the temple from top to bottom (Matt 27:51; Mark 15:38; Luke 23:45). Just as the curtain was split, so Christ’s body was broken for us, to give us access into God’s presence.</p></p>
<p id="n5801023"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801023">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and a great priest,” continuing the construction begun in v. 19.</p></p>
<p id="n5801024"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801024">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in assurance of faith.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801025"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801025">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience</i> combines the OT imagery of the sprinkling with blood to give ritual purity with the emphasis on the interior cleansing provided by the new covenant: It is the heart that is cleansed and the conscience made perfect (cf. Heb 8:10; 9:9, 14; 10:2, 16).</p></p>
<p id="n5801026"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801026">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let us consider one another for provoking of love and good deeds.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801027"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801027">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The day</i> refers to that well-known time of Christ’s coming and judgment in the future; see a similar use of “day” in 1 Cor 3:13.</p></p>
<p id="n5801028"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801028">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> This paragraph (vv. 19-25) is actually a single, skillfully composed sentence in Greek, but it must be broken into shorter segments for English idiom. It begins with several subordinate phrases (since we have confidence and a great priest), has three parallel exhortations as its main verbs (let us draw near, hold, and take thought), and concludes with several subordinate phrases related to the final exhortation (not abandoning but encouraging).</p></p>
<p id="n5801029"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801029">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is left,” with “for us” implied by the first half of the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n5801030"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801030">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “zeal,” recalling God’s jealous protection of his holiness and honor (cf. Exod 20:5).</p><p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Zeph 1:18.</p></p>
<p id="n5801031"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801031">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the enemies.”</p><p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 26:11.</p></p>
<p id="n5801032"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801032">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “dies.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801033"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801033">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Deut 17:6.</p></p>
<p id="n5801034"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801034">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “tramples under foot.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801035"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801035">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “regarded as common.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801036"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801036">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by which he was made holy.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801037"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801037">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 32:35.</p></p>
<p id="n5801038"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801038">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 32:36.</p></p>
<p id="n5801039"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801039">39</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including some significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> D<sup>2</sup> 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span>), read <span class="greek">δεσμοῖς μου</span> (<span class="translit">desmois mou</span>, “my imprisonment”) here, a reading that is probably due to the widespread belief in the early Christian centuries that Paul was the author of Hebrews (cf. Phil 1:7; Col 4:18). It may have been generated by the reading <span class="greek">δεσμοῖς</span> without the <span class="greek">μου</span> (so <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 104), the force of which is so ambiguous (lit., “you shared the sufferings with the bonds”) as to be virtually nonsensical. Most likely, <span class="greek">δεσμοῖς</span> resulted when a scribe made an error in copying <span class="greek">δεσμίοις</span> (<span class="translit">desmiois</span>), a reading which makes excellent sense (“[of] those in prison”) and is strongly supported by early and significant witnesses of the Alexandrian and Western text-forms (A D* H 6 33 81 1739 lat sy co). Thus, <span class="greek">δεσμίοις</span> best explains the rise of the other readings on both internal and external grounds and is strongly preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n5801040"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801040">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you yourselves.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801041"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801041">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which,” but showing the reason.</p></p>
<p id="n5801042"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801042">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the promise,” referring to the thing God promised, not to the pledge itself.</p></p>
<p id="n5801043"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801043">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 26:20.</p></p>
<p id="n5801044"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801044">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Hab 2:3.</p></p>
<p id="n5801045"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801045">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my soul.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801046"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801046">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Hab 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5801047"><a href="file1201.xhtml#n5801047">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not…of shrinking back to perdition but of faith to the preservation of the soul.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
