<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 13</h2>
<p id="n400131"><a href="file982.xhtml#n400131">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here <i>lake</i> refers to the Sea of Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n400132"><a href="file982.xhtml#n400132">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note at Matt 4:21 for a description of the first-century fishing boat discovered in 1986 near Tiberias on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n400133"><a href="file982.xhtml#n400133">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and all the crowd.” The clause in this phrase, although coordinate in terms of grammar, is logically subordinate to the previous clause.</p></p>
<p id="n400134"><a href="file982.xhtml#n400134">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400135"><a href="file982.xhtml#n400135">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> Though parables can contain a variety of figures of speech (cf. the remainder of chapter 13), many times they are simply stories that attempt to teach spiritual truth (which is unknown to the hearers) by using a comparison with something known to the hearers. In general, parables usually advance a single idea, though there may be many parts and characters in a single parable and subordinate ideas may expand the main idea further. The beauty of using the parable as a teaching device is that it draws the listener into the story, elicits an evaluation, and demands a response.</p></p>
<p id="n400136"><a href="file982.xhtml#n400136">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n400137"><a href="file982.xhtml#n400137">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>A sower went out to sow</i>. The background for this well-known parable, drawn from a typical scene in the Palestinian countryside, is a field through which a well-worn path runs. Sowing would occur in late fall or early winter (October to December) in the rainy season, looking for sprouting in April or May and a June harvest. The use of seed as a figure for God’s giving life has OT roots (Isa 55:10-11). The point of the parable of the sower is to illustrate the various responses to the message of the kingdom of God.</p></p>
<p id="n400138"><a href="file982.xhtml#n400138">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> In Matthew’s version of this parable, plural pronouns are used to refer to the seed in v. 4 (<span class="greek">ἅ</span>…<span class="greek">αὐτά</span> [<span class="translit">ha</span>…<span class="translit">auta</span>]), although the collective singular is used in v. 5 and following (indicated by the singular verbs like <span class="greek">ἔπεσεν</span> [<span class="translit">epesen</span>]). For the sake of consistency in English, plural pronouns referring to the seed are used in the translation throughout the Matthean account. In both Mark and Luke the collective singular is used consistently throughout (cf. Mark 4:1-9; Luke 8:4-8).</p></p>
<p id="n400139"><a href="file982.xhtml#n400139">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here and in vv. 7 and 8 <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001310"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001310">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>rocky ground</i> in Palestine would be a limestone base lying right under the soil.</p></p>
<p id="n4001311"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because it did not have depth of earth.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001312"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001312">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> Palestinian weeds like these <i>thorns</i> could grow up to 6 feet in height and have a major root system.</p></p>
<p id="n4001313"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001313">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, crowded out the good plants.</p></p>
<p id="n4001314"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “had better listen!” captures the force of the third person imperative more effectively than the traditional “let him hear,” which sounds more like a permissive than an imperative to the modern English reader. This was Jesus’ common expression to listen and heed carefully (cf. Matt 11:15; 13:43; Mark 4:9, 23; Luke 8:8; 14:35).</p></p>
<p id="n4001315"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4001316"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, he said to them.” This construction is somewhat redundant in English and has been simplified in the translation. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001317"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is an example of a “divine passive,” with God understood to be the source of the revelation (see <i>ExSyn</i> 437-38).</p></p>
<p id="n4001318"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to you it has been given to know.” The dative pronoun occurs first, in emphatic position in the Greek text, although this position is awkward in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n4001319"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the mysteries.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The key term <i>secrets</i> (<span class="greek">μυστήριον</span>, <span class="translit">mustērion</span>) can mean either (1) a new revelation or (2) a revealing interpretation of existing revelation as in Dan 2:17-23, 27-30. Jesus seems to be explaining how current events develop old promises, since the NT consistently links the events of Jesus’ ministry and message with old promises (Rom 1:1-4; Heb 1:1-2). The traditional translation of this word, “mystery,” is misleading to the modern English reader because it suggests a secret which people have tried to uncover but which they have failed to understand (L&amp;N 28.77).</p></p>
<p id="n4001320"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001320">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>What he has will be taken from him</i>. The meaning is that the one who accepts Jesus’ teaching concerning his person and the kingdom will receive a share in the kingdom now and even more in the future, but for the one who rejects Jesus’ words, the opportunity that that person presently possesses with respect to the kingdom will someday be taken away forever.</p></p>
<p id="n4001321"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with hearing,” a cognate dative that intensifies the action of the main verb “you will listen” (<i>ExSyn</i> 168-69).</p></p>
<p id="n4001322"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “look by looking.” The participle is redundant, functioning to intensify the force of the main verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4001323"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001323">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 6:9-10. Thus parables both conceal or reveal depending on whether one is open to hearing what they teach.</p></p>
<p id="n4001324"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001324">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> This beatitude highlights the great honor bestowed on the disciples to share in this salvation.</p></p>
<p id="n4001325"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>) I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001326"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001326">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is what past <i>prophets and righteous people</i> had wanted very much <i>to see</i>, yet the fulfillment had come to the disciples. This remark is like 1 Pet 1:10-12 or Heb 1:1-2.</p></p>
<p id="n4001327"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001327">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> Interestingly, the synoptic parallels each use a different word for Satan here: Mark 4:15 has “Satan,” while Luke 8:12 has “the devil.” This illustrates the fluidity of the gospel tradition in often using synonyms at the same point of the parallel tradition.</p></p>
<p id="n4001328"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001328">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> The word of Jesus has the potential to save if it germinates in a person’s heart, something the devil is very much against.</p></p>
<p id="n4001329"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001330"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001330">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The one sown on rocky ground, this is the one.” The next two statements like this one have this same syntactical structure.</p></p>
<p id="n4001331"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001331">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is temporary.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001332"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001332">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001333"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001333">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001334"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001334">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the deceitfulness of riches.” Cf. BDAG 99 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπάτη</span> 1, “the seduction which comes from wealth.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001335"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001335">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, their concern for spiritual things is crowded out by material things.</p></p>
<p id="n4001336"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001336">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek is difficult to translate because it switches from a generic “he” to three people <i>within</i> this generic class (thus, something like: “Who indeed bears fruit and yields, in one instance a hundred times, in another, sixty times, in another, thirty times”).</p></p>
<p id="n4001337"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001337">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He set before them another parable, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001338"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001338">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sowed poisonous weeds”; KJV “tares.” The Greek term <span class="greek">ζιζάνιον</span> (<span class="translit">zizanion</span>) is generally understood to refer to darnel (<i>Lolium temulentum</i>), an especially undesirable weed that bears an uncanny resemblance to wheat until the ears of grain appear (L&amp;N 3.30; BDAG 429 s.v.). So close is the resemblance to genuine wheat that darnel is sometimes called “false wheat.” Darnel is considered poisonous; ingesting the weed causes feelings of drunkenness and can prove fatal. Under Roman law the sowing of such poisonous plants in someone else’s field was specifically prohibited (C. Keener, <i>The Gospel of Matthew: A Socio-Rhetorical Commentary</i> [Eerdmans, 2009], 387). A number of recent English translations use “weeds,” but this does not convey the poisonous nature of darnel or the similarity in appearance to wheat.</p></p>
<p id="n4001339"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001339">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001340"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001340">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 8:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4001341"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001341">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>landowner</i> here refers to the owner and manager of a household.</p></p>
<p id="n4001342"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001342">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the owner’s statement.</p></p>
<p id="n4001343"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001343">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001344"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001344">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “burned, but gather”; “then” has been added to the English translation to complete the sequence begun by “First collect.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001345"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001345">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “put before.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001346"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001346">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He set before them another parable, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001347"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001347">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>mustard seed</i> was noted for its tiny size.</p></p>
<p id="n4001348"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001348">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is rhetorical hyperbole, since technically a mustard plant is not a <i>tree</i>. This could refer to one of two types of mustard plant popular in Palestine and would be either ten or twenty-five ft (3 or 7.5 m) tall.</p></p>
<p id="n4001349"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001349">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the birds of the sky” or “the birds of the heaven”; the Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) may be translated either “sky” or “heaven,” depending on the context. The idiomatic expression “birds of the sky” refers to wild birds as opposed to domesticated fowl (cf. BDAG 809 s.v. <span class="greek">πετεινόν</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4001350"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001350">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of the parable seems to be that while the kingdom of God may appear to have insignificant and unnoticeable beginnings (i.e., in the ministry of Jesus), it will someday (i.e., at the second advent) be great and quite expansive. The kingdom, however, is not to be equated with the church, but rather the church is an expression of the kingdom. Also, there is important OT background in the image of a small plant that grew and became a tree: Ezek 17:22-24 pictures the reemergence of the Davidic house where people can find calm and shelter. Like the mustard seed, it would start out small but grow to significant size.</p></p>
<p id="n4001351"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001351">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hid in.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001352"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001352">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>measure</i> was a saton, the Greek name for the Hebrew term “seah.” Three of these was a very large quantity of flour, since a saton is a little over 16 pounds (7 kg) of dry measure (or 13.13 liters). So this was over 47 lbs (21 kg) of flour total, enough to feed over a hundred people.</p></p>
<p id="n4001353"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001353">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it was all leavened.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The parable of the <i>yeast</i> and <i>the dough</i> teaches that the kingdom of God will start small but eventually grow to permeate everything. Jesus’ point was not to be deceived by its seemingly small start, the same point made in the parable of the mustard seed, which preceded this one.</p></p>
<p id="n4001354"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001354">54</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33) identify the prophet as Isaiah, a reading that is significantly harder than the generic “prophet” because the source of this prophecy is not Isaiah but Asaph in Ps 78. Jerome mentioned some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that had “Asaph” here, though none are known to exist today. This problem is difficult because of the temptation for scribes to delete the reference to Isaiah in order to clear up a discrepancy. Indeed, the vast majority of witnesses have only “the prophet” here (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> B C D L W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 0233 0242 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy co). However, as B. M. Metzger points out, “if no prophet were originally named, more than one scribe might have been prompted to insert the name of the best known prophet—something which has, in fact, happened elsewhere more than once” (<i>TCGNT</i> 27). In light of the paucity of evidence for the reading <span class="greek">᾿Ησαΐου</span>, as well as the proclivity of scribes to add his name, it is probably best to consider the shorter reading as authentic.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “was spoken by the prophet, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντος</span> (<span class="translit">legontos</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001355"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001355">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 78:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4001356"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001356">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “poisonous weeds.” See the note on the word “darnel” in 13:25.</p></p>
<p id="n4001357"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001357">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, he said.” This construction is somewhat redundant in English and has been simplified in the translation. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001358"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001358">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the sons of the kingdom.” This idiom refers to people who should properly be, or were traditionally regarded as, a part of God’s kingdom. L&amp;N 11.13 translates the phrase: “people of God’s kingdom, God’s people.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001359"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001359">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The darnels.” Here “poisonous weeds” contrasts with “the good seed” mentioned previously in the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4001360"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001360">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the sons of the evil one.” See the preceding note on the phrase “people of the kingdom” earlier in this verse, which is the opposite of this phrase. See also L&amp;N 9.4; 11.13; 11.14.</p></p>
<p id="n4001361"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001361">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Therefore as.” Here <span class="greek">οὖν</span> (<span class="translit">oun</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001362"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001362">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the darnels.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001363"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001363">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ones who practice lawlessness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001364"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001364">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Dan 3:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4001365"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001365">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Dan 12:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4001366"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001366">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “had better listen!” captures the force of the third person imperative more effectively than the traditional “let him hear,” which sounds more like a permissive than an imperative to the modern English reader. This was Jesus’ common expression to listen and heed carefully (cf. Matt 11:15; 13:9; Mark 4:9, 23; Luke 8:8; 14:35).</p></p>
<p id="n4001367"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001367">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Dan 3:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4001368"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001368">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “every scribe.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4. It is possible that the term translated “expert in the law” (traditionally, “scribe”) here is a self-description used by the author, Matthew, to represent his role in conveying the traditions about Jesus to his intended audience. See David E. Orton, <i>The Understanding Scribe</i> [JSNTSup].</p></p>
<p id="n4001369"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001369">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that when.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">καὶ ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">kai egeneto</span>, “it happened that”) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001370"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001370">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001371"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001371">71</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ <i>hometown</i> (where he spent his childhood years) was Nazareth, about 20 miles (30 km) southwest of Capernaum.</p></p>
<p id="n4001372"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001372">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “them”; the referent (the people) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4001373"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001373">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogues</i> in 4:23. Jesus undoubtedly took the opportunity on this occasion to speak about his person and mission, and the relation of both to OT fulfillment. </p></p>
<p id="n4001374"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001374">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “synagogue, so that they.” Here <span class="greek">ὥστε</span> (<span class="translit">hōste</span>) has not been translated. Instead a new sentence was started in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4001375"><a href="file982.xhtml#n4001375">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> The reference to Jesus as <i>the carpenter’s son</i> is probably derogatory, indicating that they knew Jesus only as a common laborer like themselves. The reference to <i>his mother…Mary</i> (even though Jesus’ father was probably dead by this point) appears to be somewhat derogatory, for a man was not regarded as his mother’s son in Jewish usage unless an insult was intended (cf. Judg 11:1-2; John 6:42; 8:41; 9:29).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
