<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Peter 1</h2>
<p id="n600011"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n600011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Peter.” The word “from” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n600012"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n600012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to those living as resident foreigners,” “to the exiles.” This term is used metaphorically of Christians who live in this world as foreigners, since their homeland is heaven.</p></p>
<p id="n600013"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n600013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the Diaspora.” The Greek term <span class="greek">διασπορά</span> (<span class="translit">diaspora</span>, “dispersion”) refers to Jews not living in Palestine but “dispersed” or scattered among the Gentiles. But here it is probably metaphorical, used of Gentile Christians spread out as God’s people in the midst of a godless world.</p></p>
<p id="n600014"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n600014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n600015"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n600015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the chosen sojourners…” On this reading the phrases in v. 2 describe their entire existence as sojourners, etc., not just their election.</p></p>
<p id="n600016"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n600016">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>For obedience and for sprinkling</i> indicates the purpose of their choice or election by God.</p></p>
<p id="n600017"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n600017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “be multiplied to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n600018"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n600018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is no verb in the Greek text; either the optative (“be”) or the indicative (“is”) can be supplied. The meaning of the term <span class="greek">εὐλογητός</span> (<span class="translit">eulogētos</span>) and the author’s intention at this point in the epistle must both come into play to determine which is the preferred nuance. <span class="greek">εὐλογητός</span> as an adjective can mean either that one is praised or that one is blessed, that is, in a place of favor and benefit. Two factors of the author’s style come into play. At this point the author is describing the reality of believers’ salvation and will soon explain believers’ necessary response; this is in emulation of Pauline style which generally follows the same logical order (although the author here discusses the reality in a much more compressed fashion). On the other hand, when imitating the Pauline greeting, which is normally verbless, the author inserts the optative (see v. 2 above). When considered as a whole, although a decision is difficult, the fact that the author in the immediate context has used the optative when imitating a Pauline stylized statement would argue for the optative here. The translation uses the term “blessed” in the sense “worthy of praise” as this is in keeping with the traditional translation of <i>berakah</i> psalms. Cf. also 2 Cor 1:3; Eph 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n600019"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n600019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “that is” is supplied in the translation to indicate that the imperishable inheritance is in apposition to the living hope of v. 3. </p></p>
<p id="n6000110"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “into,” continuing the description of v. 3 without an “and.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000111"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which you exult.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000112"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000112">12</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The oldest and best witnesses lack the verb (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B, along with 1448 1611 sy<sup>h</sup>), but most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A C P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 048 33 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have <span class="greek">ἐστίν</span> here (<span class="translit">estin</span>, “[if] it is [necessary]”). The verb looks to be an explanatory gloss. But if no verb is present, this opens up the time frame in the author’s mind even more, since the conditional particle for both the first class condition and the fourth class condition is <span class="greek">εἰ</span> (<span class="translit">ei</span>). That may well be what was on the author’s mind, as evidenced by some of his other allusions to suffering in this little letter (3:14, 17). NA<sup>27</sup> has the verb in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity, while NA<sup>28</sup> omits the brackets altogether.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Though now, for a little while if necessary, you may have to suffer.” </p></p>
<p id="n6000113"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “genuineness,” the result of testing. On the other hand it may denote the process of testing: “that the proving of your faith…may bring praise.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The author is not asserting that the quality of the readers’ faith is in doubt and will be proven by future trials. He declares their faith to be a present reality in v. 5 and 9, so in context v. 8 affirms that their faith is indeed genuine.</p></p>
<p id="n6000114"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which is passing away but is tested by fire,” describing gold in a lesser-to-greater comparison with faith’s proven character.</p></p>
<p id="n6000115"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that the testing of your faith…may be found unto praise,” showing the result of the trials mentioned in v. 6.</p></p>
<p id="n6000116"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at the revelation of Jesus Christ” (cf. v. 13).</p></p>
<p id="n6000117"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whom not having seen, you love.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000118"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in whom not now seeing…” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000119"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in whom not now seeing but believing, you exult.” The participles have been translated as finite verbs due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6000120"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “glorified.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000121"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about which salvation.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000122"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000122">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Prophets</i> refers to the OT prophets.</p></p>
<p id="n6000123"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who prophesied about the grace that is to/for you.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000124"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “probing.” The participle continues the sentence from v. 10 but has been translated as an indicative for English style. </p></p>
<p id="n6000125"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “time or circumstances,” focusing not on the person but on the timing and circumstances of the fulfillment.</p><p><b>sn</b> The OT prophets wondered about the <i>person</i> and the surrounding circumstances (<i>time</i>) through which God would fulfill his promised salvation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000126"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the sufferings unto Christ,” i.e., sufferings directed toward him, what he was destined to suffer.</p></p>
<p id="n6000127"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the glories after these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000128"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to whom [pl.] it was revealed.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000129"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “binding up the loins of your mind,” a figure of speech drawn from the Middle Eastern practice of gathering up long robes around the waist to prepare for work or action.</p></p>
<p id="n6000130"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having bound up…, being sober, set your hope…”</p></p>
<p id="n6000131"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at the revelation of Jesus Christ” (cf. v. 7).</p></p>
<p id="n6000132"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “do not be conformed to”; <i>Grk</i> “not being conformed to.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000133"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the former lusts in your ignorance.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000134"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000134">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 19:2.</p></p>
<p id="n6000135"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the time of your sojourn,” picturing the Christian’s life in this world as a temporary stay in a foreign country (cf. 1:1).</p></p>
<p id="n6000136"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who was foreknown,” describing Christ in v. 19. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000137"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Greek emphasizes the contrast between these two clauses more than can be easily expressed in English.</p></p>
<p id="n6000138"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at the last of the times.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000139"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000139">39</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although there may be only a slight difference in translation, the term translated as “trust” is the adjective <span class="greek">πιστούς</span> (<span class="translit">pistous</span>). This is neither as common nor as clear as the verb <span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> (<span class="translit">pisteuō</span>, “believe, trust”). Consequently, most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have the present participle <span class="greek">πιστεύοντας</span> (<span class="translit">pisteuontas</span>; <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 5 81 436 442 1175 1243 1611 1739 1852 2492 <span class="apparatus">M</span>), or the aorist participle <span class="greek">πιστεύσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">pisteusantes</span>; 33 2344), while A B 307<sup>c</sup> 1735 vg have the adjective. Though the external evidence on its behalf is not in itself compelling, internally <span class="greek">πιστούς</span> is to be preferred. In the NT the adjective is routinely taken passively in the sense of “faithful” (BDAG 820 s.v. <span class="greek">πιστός</span> 1). That may be part of the force here as well: “you are now faithful to God,” although the primary force in this context seems to be that of trusting. Nevertheless, it is difficult to separate faith from faithfulness in NT descriptions of Christians’ dependence on God.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who through him [are] trusting,” describing the “you” of v. 20. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000140"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having purified,” as the preparation for the love described in the second half of the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n6000141"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000141">41</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (P <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have <span class="greek">διὰ πνεύματος</span> (<span class="translit">dia pneumatos</span>, “through the Spirit”) after <span class="greek">ἀληθείας</span> (<span class="translit">alētheias</span>, “truth”), while the words are lacking in a broad spectrum of early and significant witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 81 323 945 1241 1739 vg sy co). On external grounds, the shorter reading cannot be easily explained if it were not autographic. The longer reading is clearly secondary, added to show more strongly God’s part in man’s obedience to the truth. But the addition ignores the force that the author gives to “purified” and ruins the balance between v. 22 and v. 23 (for in v. 23 the emphasis is on God’s part; here, on mankind’s).</p></p>
<p id="n6000142"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for sincere brotherly love.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000143"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Verses 22-23 are a single sentence in the Greek text. To improve clarity (and because contemporary English tends to use shorter sentences) these verses have been divided into three sentences in the translation. In addition, “So” has been supplied at the beginning of the second English sentence (v. 22b) to indicate the relationship with the preceding statement.</p></p>
<p id="n6000144"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000144">44</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A B 1852 vg) lack <span class="greek">καθαρᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">katharas</span>, “pure”) and read simply <span class="greek">καρδίας</span> (<span class="translit">kardias</span>, “from the heart”) ”) or <span class="greek">καρδίας ἀληθινῆς</span> (<span class="translit">kardias alēthinēs</span>, “from a true heart,” found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> vgms), but there is excellent ms support (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* C P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span> co) for the word. The omission may have been accidental. In the majuscule script (<span class="uncial">kaqaras kardias</span>) an accidental omission could have happened via homoioteleuton or homoioarcton. <span class="greek">καθαρᾶς</span> should be considered the initial reading. The NA<sup>28</sup> prints <span class="greek">καθαρᾶς καρδίας</span> with a diamond, indicating that the decision was a toss-up or, in the words of the preface, “there are two variants which in the editors’ judgement could equally well be adopted in the reconstructed initial text.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000145"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000145">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here <i>all flesh</i> is a metaphor for humanity—human beings as both frail and temporary.</p></p>
<p id="n6000146"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a wildflower.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000147"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000147">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The word of the Lord</i> is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; here and in Luke 22:61, Acts 11:16) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; Acts 8:25; 13:44, 48, 49; 15:35, 36; 16:32; 19:10, 20; 1 Thess 1:8; 4:15; 2 Thess 3:1). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said.</p></p>
<p id="n6000148"><a href="file1212.xhtml#n6000148">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 40:6, 8.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
