<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Titus 3</h2>
<p id="n560031"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n560031">1</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most later witnesses (D<sup>1</sup> 0278 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy) have <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”) after <span class="greek">ἀρχαῖς</span> (<span class="translit">archais</span>, “rulers”), though the earliest and best witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D* F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 104 1739 1881) lack the conjunction. Although the <span class="greek">καί</span> is most likely not authentic, it has been added in translation due to the requirements of English style. For more discussion, see <i>TCGNT</i> 586.</p></p>
<p id="n560032"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n560032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “discredit,” “damage the reputation of.”</p></p>
<p id="n560033"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n560033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Verses 4-7 are set as poetry in NA<sup>28</sup>. These verses probably constitute the referent of the expression “this saying” in v. 8.</p></p>
<p id="n560034"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n560034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “on us richly.”</p></p>
<p id="n560035"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n560035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is the conclusion of a single, skillfully composed sentence in Greek encompassing Titus 3:4-7. Showing the goal of God’s merciful salvation, v. 7 begins literally, “in order that, being justified…we might become heirs…”</p></p>
<p id="n560036"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n560036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “heirs according to the hope of eternal life.”</p></p>
<p id="n560037"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n560037">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>This saying</i> (<i>Grk</i> “the saying”) refers to the preceding citation (Titus 3:4-7). See 1 Tim 1:15; 3:1; 4:9; 2 Tim 2:11 for other occurrences of this phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n560038"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n560038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “concerning these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n560039"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n560039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Cf. 1 Tim 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5600310"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600310">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Fights about the law</i> were characteristic of the false teachers in Ephesus as well as in Crete (cf. 1 Tim 1:3-7; Titus 1:10, 14).</p></p>
<p id="n5600311"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing” (as a continuation of the previous clause).</p></p>
<p id="n5600312"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is perverted and is sinning.”</p></p>
<p id="n5600313"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is sinning, being self-condemned.”</p></p>
<p id="n5600314"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Eagerly help.”</p></p>
<p id="n5600315"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although it is possible the term <span class="greek">νομικός</span> (<span class="translit">nomikos</span>) indicates an expert in Jewish religious law here, according to L&amp;N 33.338 and 56.37 it is more probable that Zenas was a specialist in civil law.</p></p>
<p id="n5600316"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that nothing may be lacking for them.”</p></p>
<p id="n5600317"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that those who are ours” (referring to the Christians).</p></p>
<p id="n5600318"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and also let our people learn.”</p></p>
<p id="n5600319"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faithfully.”</p></p>
<p id="n5600320"><a href="file1188.xhtml#n5600320">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D<sup>1</sup> F G H <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy bo) conclude this letter with <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”). Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Further, early and excellent witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A C D* 048 33 81 1739 1881 sa) lack the particle, rendering the omission the preferred reading. </p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
