<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Corinthians 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Corinthians<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Lawsuits</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> When any of you has a legal dispute with another, does he dare go to court before the unrighteous rather than before the saints? <span class="verse">6:2</span> Or do you not know that the saints will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by you, are you not competent to settle trivial suits? <span class="verse">6:3</span> Do you not know that we will judge angels? Why not ordinary matters! <span class="verse">6:4</span> So if you have ordinary lawsuits, do you appoint as judges those who have no standing in the church?<sup><a id="n460061" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n460061">1</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:5</span> I say this to your shame! Is there no one among you wise enough to settle disputes between fellow Christians?<sup><a id="n460062" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n460062">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:6</span> Instead, does a Christian sue a Christian,<sup><a id="n460063" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n460063">3</a></sup> and do this before unbelievers? <span class="verse">6:7</span> The fact that you have lawsuits among yourselves demonstrates that you have already been defeated. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be cheated? <span class="verse">6:8</span> But you yourselves wrong and cheat, and you do this to your brothers and sisters!<sup><a id="n460064" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n460064">4</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:9</span> Do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived! The sexually immoral, idolaters, adulterers, passive homosexual partners,<sup><a id="n460065" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n460065">5</a></sup> practicing homosexuals,<sup><a id="n460066" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n460066">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:10</span> thieves, the greedy, drunkards, the verbally abusive,<sup><a id="n460067" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n460067">7</a></sup> and swindlers will not inherit the kingdom of God. <span class="verse">6:11</span> Some of you once lived this way.<sup><a id="n460068" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n460068">8</a></sup> But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ<sup><a id="n460069" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n460069">9</a></sup> and by the Spirit of our God. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Flee Sexual Immorality</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:12</span> “All things are lawful for me”<sup><a id="n4600610" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n4600610">10</a></sup> —but not everything is beneficial. “All things are lawful for me”—but I will not be controlled by anything. <span class="verse">6:13</span> “Food is for the stomach and the stomach is for food, but God will do away with both.”<sup><a id="n4600611" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n4600611">11</a></sup> The body is not for sexual immorality, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. <span class="verse">6:14</span> Now God indeed raised the Lord and he will raise us by his power. <span class="verse">6:15</span> Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Should I take the members of Christ and make them members of a prostitute? Never! <span class="verse">6:16</span> Or do you not know that anyone who is united with<sup><a id="n4600612" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n4600612">12</a></sup> a prostitute is one body with her?<sup><a id="n4600613" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n4600613">13</a></sup> For it is said, “<b><i>The two will become one flesh</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4600614" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n4600614">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:17</span> But the one united with<sup><a id="n4600615" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n4600615">15</a></sup> the Lord is one spirit with him.<sup><a id="n4600616" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n4600616">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:18</span> Flee sexual immorality! “Every sin a person commits is outside of the body”<sup><a id="n4600617" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n4600617">17</a></sup> —but the immoral person sins against his own body. <span class="verse">6:19</span> Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you,<sup><a id="n4600618" href="file1114_notes.xhtml#n4600618">18</a></sup> whom you have from God, and you are not your own? <span class="verse">6:20</span> For you were bought at a price. Therefore glorify God with your body. </p>

</body>
</html>