<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Philippians 3</h2>
<p id="n500031"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n500031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:12.</p></p>
<p id="n500032"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n500032">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Dogs</i> is a figurative reference to false teachers whom Paul regards as just as filthy as dogs.</p></p>
<p id="n500033"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n500033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “beware of the mutilation.”</p></p>
<p id="n500034"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n500034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is a significant wordplay here in the Greek text. In v. 2 a rare, strong word is used to describe those who were pro-circumcision (<span class="greek">κατατομή</span>, <span class="translit">katatomē</span>, “mutilation”; see BDAG 528 s.v.), while in v. 3 the normal word for circumcision is used (<span class="greek">περιτομή</span>, <span class="translit">peritomē</span>; see BDAG 807 s.v.). Both have <span class="greek">τομή</span> (the feminine form of the adjective <span class="greek">τομός</span> [<span class="translit">tomos</span>], meaning “cutting, sharp”) as their root; the direction of the action of the former is down or off (from <span class="greek">κατά</span>, <span class="translit">kata</span>), hence the implication of mutilation or emasculation, while the direction of the action of the latter is around (from <span class="greek">περί</span>, <span class="translit">peri</span>). The similarity in sound yet wide divergence of meaning between the two words highlights in no uncertain terms the differences between Paul and his opponents.</p></p>
<p id="n500035"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n500035">5</a> <p><b>tc</b> The verb <span class="greek">λατρεύω</span> (<span class="translit">latreuō</span>; here the participial form, <span class="greek">λατρεύοντες</span> [<span class="translit">latreuontes</span>]) either takes a dative direct object or no object at all, bearing virtually a technical nuance of “worshiping God” (see BDAG 587 s.v.). In this text, <span class="greek">πνεύματι</span> (<span class="translit">pneumati</span>) takes an instrumental force (“by the Spirit”) rather than functioning as object of <span class="greek">λατρεύοντες</span>. However, the word after <span class="greek">πνεύματι</span> is in question, no doubt because of the collocation with <span class="greek">λατρεύοντες</span>. Most witnesses, including some of the earliest and best representatives of the Alexandrian, Western, and Byzantine texts (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B C D<sup>2</sup> F G 0278<sup>vid</sup> 33 1241 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> co Ambr), read <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">theou</span>; thus, “worship by the Spirit of God”). But several other significant witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D* P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 365 1175 lat sy Chr) have the dative <span class="greek">θεῷ</span> (<span class="translit">theō</span>) here (“worship God by the Spirit”). <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> is virtually alone in its omission of the divine name, probably due to an unintentional oversight. The dative <span class="greek">θεῷ</span> was most likely a scribal emendation intended to give the participle its proper object, and thus avoid confusion about the force of <span class="greek">πνεύματι</span>. Although the Church came to embrace the full deity of the Spirit, the NT does not seem to speak of <i>worshiping</i> the Spirit explicitly. The reading <span class="greek">θεῷ</span> thus appears to be a clarifying reading. On external and internal grounds, then, <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> is the preferred reading.</p></p>
<p id="n500036"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n500036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have no confidence in the flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n500037"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n500037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “though I have reason for confidence even in the flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n500038"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n500038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n500039"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n500039">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>Pharisee</i> was a member of one of the most important and influential religious and political parties of Judaism in the time of Jesus. There were more Pharisees than Sadducees (according to Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 17.2.4 [17.42] there were more than 6,000 Pharisees at about this time). Pharisees differed with Sadducees on certain doctrines and patterns of behavior. The Pharisees were strict and zealous adherents to the laws of the OT and to numerous additional traditions such as angels and bodily resurrection.</p></p>
<p id="n5000310"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word here translated “dung” was often used in Greek as a vulgar term for fecal matter. As such it would most likely have had a certain shock value for the readers. This may well be Paul’s meaning here, especially since the context is about what the <i>flesh</i> produces.</p></p>
<p id="n5000311"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faith in Christ.” A decision is difficult here. Though traditionally translated “faith in Jesus Christ,” an increasing number of NT scholars are arguing that <span class="greek">πίστις Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">pistis Christou</span>) and similar phrases in Paul (here and in Rom 3:22, 26; Gal 2:16, 20; 3:22; Eph 3:12) involve a <i>subjective</i> genitive and mean “Christ’s faith” or “Christ’s faithfulness” (cf., e.g., G. Howard, “The ‘Faith of Christ’,” <i>ExpTim</i> 85 [1974]: 212-15; R. B. Hays, <i>The Faith of Jesus Christ</i> [SBLDS]; Morna D. Hooker, “<span class="greek">Πίστις Χριστοῦ</span>,” <i>NTS</i> 35 [1989]: 321-42). Noteworthy among the arguments for the subjective genitive view is that when <span class="greek">πίστις</span> takes a personal genitive it is almost never an objective genitive (cf. Matt 9:2, 22, 29; Mark 2:5; 5:34; 10:52; Luke 5:20; 7:50; 8:25, 48; 17:19; 18:42; 22:32; Rom 1:8; 12; 3:3; 4:5, 12, 16; 1 Cor 2:5; 15:14, 17; 2 Cor 10:15; Phil 2:17; Col 1:4; 2:5; 1 Thess 1:8; 3:2, 5, 10; 2 Thess 1:3; Titus 1:1; Phlm 6; 1 Pet 1:9, 21; 2 Pet 1:5). On the other hand, the <i>objective</i> genitive view has its adherents: A. Hultgren, “The <i>Pistis Christou</i> Formulations in Paul,” <i>NovT</i> 22 (1980): 248-63; J. D. G. Dunn, “Once More, <span class="greek">ΠΙΣΤΙΣ ΧΡΙΣΤΟΥ</span>,” <i>SBL Seminar Papers</i>, <i>1991,</i> 730-44. Most commentaries on Romans and Galatians usually side with the objective view. </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>ExSyn</i> 116, which notes that the grammar is not decisive, nevertheless suggests that “the faith/faithfulness of Christ is not a denial of faith <i>in</i> Christ as a Pauline concept (for the idea is expressed in many of the same contexts, only with the verb <span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> rather than the noun), but implies that the object of faith is a worthy object, for he himself is faithful.” Though Paul elsewhere teaches justification by faith, this presupposes that the <i>object</i> of our faith is reliable and worthy of such faith.</p></p>
<p id="n5000312"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “in fact” are supplied because of English style, picking up the force of the Greek article with <span class="greek">πίστει</span> (<span class="translit">pistei</span>). See also the following note on the word “Christ’s.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000313"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “based on the faithfulness.” The article before <span class="greek">πίστει</span> (<span class="translit">pistei</span>) is taken as anaphoric, looking back to <span class="greek">διὰ πίστεως Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">dia pisteōs Christou</span>); hence, “Christ’s” is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n5000314"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “based on faith.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000315"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The articular infinitive <span class="greek">τοῦ γνῶναι</span> (<span class="translit">tou gnōnai</span>, “to know”) here expresses purpose. The words “My aim is” have been supplied in the translation to emphasize this nuance and to begin a new sentence (shorter sentences are more appropriate for English style).</p></p>
<p id="n5000316"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to know him, the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000317"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">εἰ πῶς</span> (<span class="translit">ei pōs</span>) as “so, somehow” see BDAG 279, s.v. <span class="greek">εἰ</span> 6.n.</p></p>
<p id="n5000318"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that for which I also was laid hold of by Christ Jesus.” The passive has been translated as active in keeping with contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n5000319"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:12.</p></p>
<p id="n5000320"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But this one thing (I do).”</p></p>
<p id="n5000321"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to the goal.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000322"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “prize, namely, the heavenly calling of God.” </p></p>
<p id="n5000324"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those of us who are ‘perfect’ should think this,” or possibly “those of us who are mature should think this.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The adjective <i>perfect</i> comes from the same root as the verb <i>perfected</i> in v. 12; Paul may well be employing a wordplay to draw in his opponents. Thus, <i>perfect</i> would then be in quotation marks and Paul would then argue that no one—neither they nor he—is in fact perfect. The thrust of vv. 1-16 is that human credentials can produce <i>nothing</i> that is pleasing to God (vv. 1-8). Instead of relying on such, Paul urges his readers to trust God for their righteousness (v. 9) rather than their own efforts, and at the same time to press on for the prize that awaits them (vv. 12-14). He argues further that perfection is unattainable in this life (v. 15), yet the level of maturity that one has reached should not for this reason be abandoned (v. 16).</p></p>
<p id="n5000325"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “reveal this to you.” The referent of the pronoun “this” is the fact that the person is thinking differently than Paul does. This has been specified in the translation with the phrase “the error of your ways”; Paul is stating that God will make it known to these believers when they are not in agreement with Paul.</p></p>
<p id="n5000326"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000326">26</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although <span class="greek">κανόνι</span> (<span class="translit">kanoni</span>, “standard, rule”) is found in most witnesses, though in various locations in this verse (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 1505 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span>), it is almost surely a motivated reading, for it clarifies the cryptic <span class="greek">τῷ αὐτῷ</span> (<span class="translit">tō autō</span>, “the same”). Both the fact that the word floats, and that there are other variants which accomplish greater clarity by other means, strongly suggests the secondary nature of any of the longer readings here. Further, the shortest text has excellent and early support in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>16,46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B I<sup>vid</sup> 6 33 1739 co, rendering it decidedly the preferred reading. The translation adds “standard” because of English requirements, not because of textual basis.</p></p>
<p id="n5000327"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Nevertheless, to what we have attained, to the same hold fast.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000328"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000328">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “become fellow imitators with me [of Christ].”</p></p>
<p id="n5000329"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:12.</p></p>
<p id="n5000330"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000330">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whose end is destruction, whose god is the belly and glory is their shame, these who think of earthly things.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000331"><a href="file1156.xhtml#n5000331">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “transform the body of our humility.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
