<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 18</h2>
<p id="n420181"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n420181">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n420182"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n420182">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n420183"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n420183">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “should pray at all times” (L&amp;N 67.88).</p></p>
<p id="n420184"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n420184">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is one of the few parables that comes with an explanation at the start:…<i>they should always pray and not lose heart</i>. It is part of Luke’s goal in encouraging Theophilus (1:4).</p></p>
<p id="n420185"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n420185">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “lose heart, saying.” This is a continuation of the previous sentence in the Greek text, but a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the pronominal subject “He.”</p></p>
<p id="n420186"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n420186">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “town.”</p></p>
<p id="n420187"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n420187">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>judge</i> here is apparently portrayed as a civil judge who often handled financial cases.</p></p>
<p id="n420188"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n420188">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “man,” but the singular <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used as a generic in comparison to God.</p></p>
<p id="n420189"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n420189">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>widow</i> was not necessarily old, since many people lived only into their thirties in the 1st century.</p></p>
<p id="n4201810"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201810">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “town.” </p></p>
<p id="n4201811"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201811">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is an iterative imperfect; the widow did this on numerous occasions.</p></p>
<p id="n4201812"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201812">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And for.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201813"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201813">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “after these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201814"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201814">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “man,” but the singular <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used as a generic in comparison to God.</p></p>
<p id="n4201815"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">ὑπωπιάζω</span> (<span class="translit">hupōpiazō</span>) in this context means “to wear someone out by continual annoying” (L&amp;N 25.245).</p></p>
<p id="n4201816"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201816">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by her continual coming,” but the point of annoyance to the judge is her constant pleas for justice (v. 3).</p></p>
<p id="n4201817"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201817">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Listen to what the unrighteous judge says!</i> The point of the parable is that the judge’s lack of compassion was overcome by the widow’s persistence.</p></p>
<p id="n4201818"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201818">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201819"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201819">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> The prayers have to do with the righteous <i>who cry out to him</i> to receive justice. The context assumes the righteous are persecuted.</p></p>
<p id="n4201820"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201820">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The emphatic particles in this sentence indicate that God will indeed give justice to the righteous.</p></p>
<p id="n4201821"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201821">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> The issue of <i>delay</i> has produced a whole host of views for this verse. (1) Does this assume provision to endure in the meantime? Or (2) does it mean God restricts the level of persecution until he comes? Either view is possible.</p></p>
<p id="n4201822"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201822">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Some argue this should be translated “suddenly.” When vindication comes it will be quick. But the more natural meaning is “soon.” God will not forget his elect and will respond to them. It may be that this verse has a prophetic perspective. In light of the eternity that comes, vindication is soon.</p></p>
<p id="n4201823"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201823">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Will he find faith on earth?</i> The Son of Man is looking for those who continue to believe in him, despite the wait.</p></p>
<p id="n4201824"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201824">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201825"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201825">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and despised.” This is a second parable with an explanatory introduction.</p></p>
<p id="n4201826"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201826">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> The temple is on a hill in Jerusalem, so one would go <i>up</i> to enter its precincts.</p></p>
<p id="n4201827"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201827">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n4201828"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201828">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>tax collectors</i> in 3:12.</p></p>
<p id="n4201829"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201829">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “stood by himself and prayed like this.” The prepositional phrase <span class="greek">πρὸς ἑαυτόν</span> (<span class="translit">pros eauton</span>, “to/about himself”) could go with either the aorist participle <span class="greek">σταθείς</span> (<span class="translit">statheis</span>, “stood”) or with the imperfect verb <span class="greek">προσηύχετο</span> (<span class="translit">prosēucheto</span>, “he prayed”). If taken with the participle, then the meaning would seem at first glance to be: “stood ‘by himself’,” or “stood ‘alone’.” Now it is true that <span class="greek">πρός</span> can mean “by” or “with” when used with intransitive verbs such as <span class="greek">ἵστημι</span> (<span class="translit">histēmi</span>, “I stand”; cf. BDAG 874 s.v. <span class="greek">πρός</span> 2.a), but <span class="greek">πρὸς ἑαυτόν</span> together never means “by himself” or “alone” in biblical Greek. On the other hand, if <span class="greek">πρὸς ἑαυτόν</span> is taken with the verb, then two different nuances emerge, both of which highlight in different ways the principal point Jesus seems to be making about the arrogance of this religious leader: (1) “prayed <i>to</i> himself,” but not necessarily silently, or (2) “prayed <i>about</i> himself,” with the connotation that he prayed out loud, for all to hear. Since his prayer is really a review of his moral résumé, directed both at advertising his own righteousness and exposing the perversion of the tax collector, whom he actually mentions in his prayer, the latter option seems preferable. If this is the case, then the Pharisee’s mention of God is really nothing more than a formality.</p></p>
<p id="n4201830"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201830">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Pharisee’s prayer started out as a thanksgiving psalm to <i>God</i>, but the praise ended up not being about God.</p></p>
<p id="n4201831"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201831">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>) is used as a generic and can refer to both men and women (NASB, NRSV, “people”; NLT, “everyone else”; NAB, “the rest of humanity”).</p></p>
<p id="n4201832"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201832">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “swindlers” (BDAG 134 s.v. <span class="greek">ἅρπαξ</span> 2); see also Isa 10:2; Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 6.3.4 [6.203].</p></p>
<p id="n4201833"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201833">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> A general category for “sinners” (1 Cor 6:9; Lev 19:3).</p></p>
<p id="n4201834"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201834">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note what the Pharisee assumes about the righteousness of <i>this tax collector</i> by grouping him with <i>extortionists, unrighteous people</i>, and <i>adulterers</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4201835"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201835">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> The law only required fasting on the Day of Atonement. Such voluntary fasting as this practiced <i>twice a week</i> by the Pharisee normally took place on Monday and Thursday.</p></p>
<p id="n4201836"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201836">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I tithe.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201837"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201837">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “standing”; the Greek participle has been translated as a finite verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4201838"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201838">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “even lift up his eyes” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4201839"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201839">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The prayer is a humble call for forgiveness. The term for mercy (<span class="greek">ἱλάσκομαι</span>, <span class="translit">hilaskomai</span>) is associated with the concept of a request for atonement (BDAG 473-74 s.v. 1; Pss 51:1, 3; 25:11; 34:6, 18).</p></p>
<p id="n4201840"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201840">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the sinner.” The tax collector views himself not just as any sinner but as the worst of all sinners. See <i>ExSyn</i> 222-23.</p></p>
<p id="n4201841"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201841">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> The prayer that was heard and honored was the one given with humility; in a surprising reversal it was the tax collector who <i>went down to his home justified</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4201842"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201842">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the other”; the referent (the Pharisee, v. 10) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201843"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201843">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Everyone who exalts himself</i>. See Luke 14:11. Jesus often called for humility and condemned those who sought honor.</p></p>
<p id="n4201844"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201844">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201845"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201845">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">βρέφος</span> (<span class="translit">brephos</span>) here can refer to babies or to toddlers (2:12, 16; Acts 7:19; 2 Tim 3:15; 1 Pet 2:2).</p></p>
<p id="n4201846"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201846">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that he would touch them.” Here the touch is connected with (or conveys) a blessing (cf. Mark 10:16; also BDAG 126 s.v. <span class="greek">ἅπτω</span> 2.c).</p></p>
<p id="n4201847"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201847">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the disciples began to scold them.” In the translation the referent has been specified as “those who brought them,” since otherwise the statement could be understood to mean that the disciples began scolding the children rather than their parents who brought them.</p></p>
<p id="n4201848"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201848">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “summoned them”; the referent (the children) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201849"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201849">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n4201850"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201850">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The kingdom of God belongs to such as these</i>. Children are a picture of those whose simple trust illustrates what faith is all about. The remark illustrates how everyone is important to God, even those whom others regard as insignificant.</p></p>
<p id="n4201851"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201851">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201852"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201852">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>receive</i> see John 1:12.</p></p>
<p id="n4201853"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201853">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of the comparison <i>receive the kingdom of God like a child</i> has more to do with a child’s trusting spirit and willingness to be dependent and receive from others than any inherent humility the child might possess.</p></p>
<p id="n4201854"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201854">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> The negation in Greek used here (<span class="greek">οὐ μή</span>, <span class="translit">ou mē</span>) is very strong.</p></p>
<p id="n4201855"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201855">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4201856"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201856">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a certain ruler.” BDAG 140 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄρχων</span> 2.a takes this to be a member of the Sanhedrin, but Bock understands this to be “an influential wealthy man or civic leader who may have been known for his piety” (D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> [BECNT] 2:1476).</p><p><b>sn</b> Only Luke states this man is a <i>leader</i> (cf. the parallels in Matt 19:16-22 and Mark 10:17-22, where the questioner is described only as “someone”). He is probably a civic leader of some kind, a leader in the society.</p></p>
<p id="n4201857"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201857">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> The rich man wanted to know what he must <i>do to inherit eternal life</i>, but Jesus had just finished teaching that eternal life was not earned but simply received (18:17). See the similar question about inheriting <i>eternal life</i> in Luke 10:25.</p></p>
<p id="n4201858"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201858">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Jesus.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201859"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201859">59</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ response, <i>Why do you call me good?</i>, was designed to cause the ruler to stop and think for a moment about who Jesus really was. The following statement <i>No one is good except God alone</i> seems to point the man in the direction of Jesus’ essential nature and the demands which logically follow on the man for having said it.</p></p>
<p id="n4201860"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201860">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 20:12-16 and Deut 5:16-20. Jesus cited the parts of the ten commandments that relate to how others should be treated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201861"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201861">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he”; the referent (the ruler mentioned in v. 18) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201862"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201862">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “kept.” The implication of this verb is that the man has obeyed the commandments without fail throughout his life, so the adverb “wholeheartedly” has been added to the translation to bring out this nuance.</p></p>
<p id="n4201863"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201863">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these things.” The referent of the pronoun (the laws mentioned by Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> While the rich man was probably being sincere when he insisted <i>I have wholeheartedly obeyed all these laws</i>, he had confined his righteousness to external obedience. The rich man’s response to Jesus’ command to give away all he had revealed that internally he loved money more than God.</p></p>
<p id="n4201864"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201864">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Since my youth</i>. Judaism regarded the age of thirteen as the age when a man would have become responsible to live by God’s commands.</p></p>
<p id="n4201865"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201865">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Luke 14:33.</p></p>
<p id="n4201866"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201866">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the money” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201867"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201867">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Luke 1:50-53; 6:20-23; 14:12-14.</p></p>
<p id="n4201868"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201868">68</a> <p><b>sn</b> The call for sacrifice comes with a promise of eternal reward:…<i>you will have treasure in heaven</i>. Jesus’ call is a test to see how responsive the man is to God’s direction through him. Will he walk the path God’s agent calls him to walk? For a rich person who got it right, see Zacchaeus in Luke 19:1-10.</p></p>
<p id="n4201869"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201869">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the conversation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201870"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201870">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201871"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201871">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “very distressed” (L&amp;N 25.277).</p></p>
<p id="n4201872"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201872">72</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The phrase <span class="greek">περίλυπον γενόμενον</span> (<span class="translit">perilupon genomenon</span>, “[When Jesus saw him] becoming sad”) is found in the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A [D] W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 078 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33<sup>vid</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy), and it is not unknown in Lukan style to repeat a word or phrase in adjacent passages (<i>TCGNT</i> 143). However, the phrase is lacking in some significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L ƒ<sup>1</sup> 579 1241 2542 co). The shorter reading is nevertheless difficult to explain if it is not autographic: It is possible that these witnesses omitted this phrase out of perceived redundancy from the preceding verse, although intentional omissions, especially by several and varied witnesses, are generally unlikely. NA<sup>28</sup> places the words in brackets, indicating doubts as to their authenticity.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201873"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201873">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>For the rich</i> it is <i>hard</i> for wealth not to be the point of focus, as the contrast in vv. 28-30 will show, and for rich people to trust God. Wealth was not an automatic sign of blessing as far as Jesus was concerned.</p></p>
<p id="n4201874"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201874">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. See the note on this phrase in v. 16.</p></p>
<p id="n4201875"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201875">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>eye of a needle</i> refers to a sewing needle, one of the smallest items one might deal with on a regular basis, in contrast to the biggest animal of the region. (Although the story of a small gate in Jerusalem known as “The Needle’s Eye” has been widely circulated and may go back as far as the middle ages, there is no evidence that such a gate ever existed.) Jesus is saying rhetorically that this is impossible, unless God (v. 27) intervenes.</p></p>
<p id="n4201876"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201876">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of thought.</p></p>
<p id="n4201877"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201877">77</a> <p><b>sn</b> The assumption is that the rich are blessed, so if they risk exclusion, who is left to <i>be saved</i>?</p></p>
<p id="n4201878"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201878">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>impossible</i> is in the emphatic position in the Greek text. God makes the impossible possible.</p></p>
<p id="n4201879"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201879">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἄνθρωποις</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpois</span>) is used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women (cf. NASB 1995 update, “people”). Because of the contrast here between mere mortals and God (“impossible for <i>men</i>…possible for <i>God</i>”) the phrase “mere humans” has been used in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201880"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201880">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “left our homes,” “left our possessions”; <i>Grk</i> “left our own things.” The word <span class="greek">ἴδιος</span> (<span class="translit">idios</span>) can refer to one’s home (including the people and possessions in it) or to one’s property or possessions. Both options are mentioned in BDAG 467 s.v. 4.b. See also I. H. Marshall, <i>Luke</i> (NIGTC), 688; D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> (BECNT), 2:1488.</p></p>
<p id="n4201881"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201881">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201882"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201882">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201883"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201883">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201884"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201884">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “brothers” could be understood as generic here, referring to either male or female siblings. However, it is noteworthy that in the parallel passages in both Matt 19:29 and Mark 10:29, “sisters” are explicitly mentioned in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n4201885"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201885">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus reassures his disciples with a promise that (1) much benefit in this life (<i>many times more</i>) and (2) <i>eternal life</i> in the age to come will be given.</p></p>
<p id="n4201886"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201886">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this time” (<span class="greek">καιρός</span>, <span class="translit">kairos</span>), but for stylistic reasons this has been translated “this age” here.</p></p>
<p id="n4201887"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201887">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note that Luke (see also Matt 19:29; Mark 10:30; Luke 10:25) portrays <i>eternal life</i> as something one receives <i>in the age to come</i>, unlike John, who emphasizes the possibility of receiving eternal life in the present (John 5:24).</p></p>
<p id="n4201888"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201888">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201889"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201889">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201891"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201891">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “fulfilled.” Jesus goes to Jerusalem by divine plan as the scripture records (Luke 2:39; 12:50; 22:37; Acts 13:29). See Luke 9:22, 44.</p></p>
<p id="n4201892"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201892">92</a> <p><b>sn</b> The passive voice verb <i>be handed over</i> does not indicate by whom, but other passages note the Jewish leadership and betrayal (9:22, 44).</p></p>
<p id="n4201893"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201893">93</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Luke 22:63; 23:11, 36.</p></p>
<p id="n4201894"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201894">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and insulted.” L&amp;N 33.390 and 88.130 note <span class="greek">ὑβρίζω</span> (<span class="translit">hubrizō</span>) can mean either “insult” or “mistreat with insolence.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201895"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201895">95</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>And spat on</i>. Later Luke does not note this detail in the passion narrative in chaps. 22-23, but see Mark 14:65; 15:19; Matt 26:67; 27:30 where Jesus’ prediction is fulfilled.</p></p>
<p id="n4201896"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201896">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “scourge” (the term means to beat severely with a whip, L&amp;N 19.9). BDAG 620 s.v. <span class="greek">μαστιγόω</span> 1. states, “Of the beating (Lat. <i>verberatio</i>) given those condemned to death…J 19:1; cf. Mt 20:19; Mk 10:34; Lk 18:33.” Here the term has been translated “flog…severely” to distinguish it from the term <span class="greek">φραγελλόω</span> (<span class="translit">phragelloō</span>) used in Matt 27:26; Mark 15:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4201897"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201897">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “yet” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201898"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201898">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast.</p></p>
<p id="n4201899"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n4201899">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the twelve, v. 31) has been specified in the context for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42018100"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And this.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42018101"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018101">101</a> <p><b>sn</b> This failure of the Twelve to <i>grasp what Jesus meant</i> probably does not mean that they did not understand linguistically what Jesus said, but that they could not comprehend how this could happen to him, if he was really God’s agent. The saying being <i>hidden</i> probably refers to God’s sovereign timing.</p></p>
<p id="n42018102"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the things having been said.” The active agent, Jesus, has been specified for clarity, and “said” has been translated as “meant” to indicate that comprehension of the significance is really in view here.</p></p>
<p id="n42018103"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that as.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42018104"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42018105"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase is “he drew near to” (19:29; 24:28). It is also possible the term merely means “is in the vicinity of.” Also possible is a reversal in the timing of the healing and Zacchaeus events for literary reasons as the blind man “sees” where the rich man with everything did not.</p></p>
<p id="n42018107"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated. “They” could refer to bystanders or people in the crowd.</p></p>
<p id="n42018108"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the blind man learning that Jesus was nearby.</p></p>
<p id="n42018109"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “called out, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42018110"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018110">110</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus was more than a Nazarene to this blind person, who saw quite well that Jesus was <i>Son of David</i>. He understood what Luke 7:22-23 affirms. There was a tradition in Judaism that the Son of David (Solomon) had great powers of healing (Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 8.2.5 [8.42-49]).</p></p>
<p id="n42018111"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018111">111</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Have mercy on me</i> is a request for healing (cf. 17:13). It is not owed the man. He simply asks for God’s kind grace.</p></p>
<p id="n42018112"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018112">112</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, those who were at the <i>front</i> of the procession.</p></p>
<p id="n42018113"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rebuked.” The crowd’s view was that surely Jesus would not be bothered with someone as unimportant as a blind beggar.</p></p>
<p id="n42018114"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018114">114</a> <p><b>sn</b> Public opinion would not sway the blind man from getting Jesus’ attention. The term <i>shouted</i> is strong as it can be used of animal cries.</p></p>
<p id="n42018115"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the beggar’s cries. </p></p>
<p id="n42018116"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ordered him”; the referent (the blind beggar, v. 35) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42018117"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the beggar) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42018118"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42018119"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n42018120"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Lord, that I may see [again].” The phrase can be rendered as an imperative of request, “Please, give me sight.” Since the man is not noted as having been blind from birth (as the man in John 9 was) it is likely the request is to receive back the sight he once had.</p></p>
<p id="n42018121"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42018122"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Regain” (see the note on the phrase “let me see again” in the previous verse).</p></p>
<p id="n42018123"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has saved you,” but in a nonsoteriological sense; the man has been delivered from his disability.</p></p>
<p id="n42018124"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “received” (see the note on the phrase “let me see again” in v. 41).</p></p>
<p id="n42018125"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42018126"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018126">126</a> <p><b>sn</b> The presence of God’s work leads again to joy, with both the beggar and the people <i>praising God</i> (1:64; 2:20; 5:25-26; 7:16; 13:13; 17:15; 19:37).</p></p>
<p id="n42018127"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42018128"><a href="file1033.xhtml#n42018128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “too” has been supplied for stylistic reasons.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
