<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n590051"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n590051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “wail”; <i>Grk</i> “crying aloud.”</p></p>
<p id="n590052"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n590052">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “hoarded up treasure for the last days”; <i>Grk</i> “in the last days.”</p></p>
<p id="n590053"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n590053">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “Lord of Hosts” or “Lord Sabaoth,” which means “Lord of the [heavenly] armies,” sometimes translated more generally as “Lord Almighty.”</p></p>
<p id="n590054"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n590054">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> James’ point seems to be that instead of seeking deliverance from condemnation, they have defied God’s law (<i>fattened your hearts</i>) and made themselves more likely objects of his judgment (<i>in a day of slaughter</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n590055"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n590055">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Literally a series of verbs without connectives, “you have condemned, you have murdered…he does not resist.”</p></p>
<p id="n590056"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n590056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers”; this phrase occurs again three times in the paragraph. See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n590057"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n590057">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “advent”; or “coming” (also in v. 8).</p></p>
<p id="n590058"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n590058">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold! The farmer waits.”</p></p>
<p id="n590059"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n590059">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “being patient.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900510"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5900511"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900511">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>gates</i> is used metaphorically here. The physical referent would be the entrances to the city, but the author uses the term to emphasize the imminence of the judge’s approach.</p></p>
<p id="n5900512"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5900513"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold! We regard…”</p></p>
<p id="n5900514"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900514">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Exod 34:6; Neh 9:17; Pss 86:15; 102:13; Joel 2:13; Jonah 4:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5900515"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5900516"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “anointing.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900517"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it will be forgiven him.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900518"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the fervent prayer of a righteous person is very powerful”; <i>Grk</i> “is very powerful in its working.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900519"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although it is certainly true that Elijah was a “man,” here <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) has been translated as “human being” because the emphasis in context is not on Elijah’s masculine gender, but on the common humanity he shared with the author and the readers.</p></p>
<p id="n5900520"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he prayed with prayer” (using a Hebrew idiom to show intensity).</p></p>
<p id="n5900521"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events.</p></p>
<p id="n5900522"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5900523"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the error of his way” (using the same root as the verb “to wander, to err” in the first part of the verse).</p></p>
<p id="n5900524"><a href="file1210.xhtml#n5900524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his soul”; the referent (the sinner mentioned at the beginning of the verse) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
