<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Galatians 2</h2>
<p id="n480022"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n480022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I went up”; one always spoke idiomatically of going “up” to Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n480023"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n480023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in accordance with.” According to BDAG 512 s.v. <span class="greek">κατά</span> B.5.a.<span class="greek">δ</span>, “Oft. the norm is at the same time the reason, so that <i>in accordance with</i> and <i>because of</i> are merged…Instead of ‘in accordance w.’ <span class="greek">κ</span>. can mean simply <i>because of</i>, <i>as a result of</i>, <i>on the basis of</i>…<span class="greek">κ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἀποκάλυψιν</span> Gal 2:2.”</p></p>
<p id="n480024"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n480024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “set before them.”</p></p>
<p id="n480025"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n480025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Gentiles, but only privately…to make sure.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started with “But” and the words “I did so,” an implied repetition from the previous clause, were supplied to make a complete English sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n480026"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n480026">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 87.42 has “important persons, influential persons, prominent persons” for <span class="greek">οἱ δοκοῦντες</span> and translates this phrase in Gal 2:2 as “in a private meeting with the prominent persons.” The “prominent people” referred to here are the leaders of the Jerusalem church.</p></p>
<p id="n480027"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n480027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the first verb (<span class="greek">τρέχω</span>, <span class="translit">trechō</span>, “was not running”) is present subjunctive, while the second (<span class="greek">ἔδραμον</span>, <span class="translit">edramon</span>, “had not run”) is aorist indicative.</p></p>
<p id="n480028"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n480028">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But,” translated here as “Yet” for stylistic reasons (note the use of “but” in v. 2).</p></p>
<p id="n480029"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n480029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> No subject and verb are expressed in vv. 4-5, but the phrase “Now this matter arose,” implied from v. 3, was supplied to make a complete English sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n4800210"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The adjective <span class="greek">παρεισάκτους</span> (<span class="translit">pareisaktous</span>), which relates to someone joining a group with false motives or false pretenses, applies to the “false brothers.” Although the expression “false brothers with false pretenses” is somewhat redundant, it captures the emphatic force of Paul’s expression, which labels both these “brothers” as false (<span class="greek">ψευδαδέλφους</span>, <span class="translit">pseudadelphous</span>) as well as their motives. See L&amp;N 34.29 for more information.</p></p>
<p id="n4800211"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb translated here as “spy on” (<span class="greek">κατασκοπέω</span>, <span class="translit">kataskopeō</span>) can have a neutral nuance, but here the connotation is certainly negative (so F. F. Bruce, <i>Galatians</i> [NIGTC], 112-13, and E. Burton, <i>Galatians</i> [ICC], 83).</p></p>
<p id="n4800212"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in order that they might enslave us.” The <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clause with the subjunctive verb <span class="greek">καταδουλώσουσιν</span> (<span class="translit">katadoulōsousin</span>) has been translated as an English infinitival clause.</p></p>
<p id="n4800213"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “slaves, nor did we…” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, <span class="greek">οὐδέ</span> (<span class="translit">oude</span>) was translated as “But…even” and a new sentence started in the translation at the beginning of v. 5.</p></p>
<p id="n4800214"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “we did not cave in to their demands.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800215"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “even for an hour” (an idiom for a very short period of time).</p></p>
<p id="n4800216"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800216">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>In order that the truth of the gospel would remain with you</i>. Paul evidently viewed the demands of the so-called “false brothers” as a departure from the <i>truth</i> contained in the <i>gospel</i> he preached. This was a very serious charge (see Gal 1:8).</p></p>
<p id="n4800217"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “influential leaders.” BDAG 255 s.v. <span class="greek">δοκέω</span> 2.a.<span class="greek">β</span> has “<i>the influential men</i> Gal 2:2, 6b. A fuller expr. w. the same mng., w. inf. added…vss. 6a, 9.” This refers to the leadership of the Jerusalem church. </p></p>
<p id="n4800218"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God does not receive the face of man,” an idiom for showing favoritism or partiality (BDAG 887-88 s.v. <span class="greek">πρόσωπον</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span>; L&amp;N 88.238).</p></p>
<p id="n4800219"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “influential people”; here “leaders” was used rather than “people” for stylistic reasons, to avoid redundancy with the word “people” in the previous parenthetical remark. See also the note on the word “influential” at the beginning of this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4800220"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “contributed.” This is the same word translated “go to ask advice from” in 1:16, but it has a different meaning here; see L&amp;N 59.72.</p></p>
<p id="n4800221"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “added nothing to my authority.” <i>Grk</i> “added nothing to me,” with what was added (“message,” etc.) implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4800222"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἰδόντες</span> (<span class="translit">idontes</span>) has been taken temporally to retain the structure of the passage. Many modern translations, because of the length of the sentence here, translate this participle as a finite verb and break the Greek sentences into several English sentences (NIV, for example, begins new sentences at the beginning of both vv. 8 and 9).</p></p>
<p id="n4800223"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the uncircumcision,” that is, to the Gentiles.</p></p>
<p id="n4800224"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the circumcision,” a collective reference to the Jewish people.</p></p>
<p id="n4800225"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “worked through”; the same word is also used in relation to Paul later in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4800226"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “his ministry as an apostle.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800227"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the circumcision,” i.e., the Jewish people.</p></p>
<p id="n4800228"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “also empowered me to the Gentiles.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800229"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800229">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cephas</i>. This individual is generally identified with the Apostle Peter (L&amp;N 93.211). Both the Aramaic name “Cephas” and the Greek name “Peter” are related to words in each language which mean “rock.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800230"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who were influential as,” or “who were reputed to be.” See also the note on the word “influential” in 2:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4800231"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800231">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Pillars</i> is figurative here for those like James, Peter, and John who were leaders in the Jerusalem church.</p></p>
<p id="n4800232"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">γνόντες</span> (<span class="translit">gnontes</span>) has been taken temporally. It is structurally parallel to the participle translated “when they saw” in v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n4800233"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “me and Barnabas.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800234"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so,” with the <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) indicating the result of the “pillars” extending the “right hand of fellowship,” but the translation “they gave…the right hand of fellowship so that we would go” could be misunderstood as purpose here. The implication of the scene is that an agreement, outlined at the end of v. 10, was reached between Paul and Barnabas on the one hand and the “pillars” of the Jerusalem church on the other.</p></p>
<p id="n4800235"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the circumcision,” a collective reference to the Jewish people.</p></p>
<p id="n4800236"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “only that we remember the poor”; the words “They requested” have been supplied from the context to make a complete English sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n4800237"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800237">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cephas</i>. This individual is generally identified with the Apostle Peter (L&amp;N 93.211). Both the Aramaic name “Cephas” and the Greek name “Peter” are related to words in each language which mean “rock.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800239"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because he stood condemned.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800240"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800240">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> The conjunction <span class="greek">γάρ</span> has not been translated here. </p></p>
<p id="n4800241"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he drew back.” If <span class="greek">ἑαυτόν</span> (<span class="translit">heauton</span>) goes with both <span class="greek">ὑπέστελλεν</span> (<span class="translit">hupestellen</span>) and <span class="greek">ἀφώριζεν</span> (<span class="translit">aphōrizen</span>) rather than only the latter, the meaning would be “he drew himself back” (see BDAG 1041 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑποστέλλω</span> 1.a).</p></p>
<p id="n4800242"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and held himself aloof.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800243"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the [ones] of the circumcision,” that is, the group of Jewish Christians who insisted on circumcision of Gentiles before they could become Christians.</p></p>
<p id="n4800244"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800244">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “with them” are a reflection of the <span class="greek">σύν</span>- (<span class="translit">sun</span>-) prefix on the verb <span class="greek">συναπήχθη</span> (<span class="translit">sunapēchthē</span>; see L&amp;N 31.76).</p></p>
<p id="n4800245"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἀναγκάζεις</span> (<span class="translit">anankazeis</span>) has been translated as a conative present (see <i>ExSyn</i> 534).</p></p>
<p id="n4800246"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by nature.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800247"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800247">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and not sinners from among the Gentiles.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800248"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “yet knowing”; the participle <span class="greek">εἰδότες</span> (<span class="translit">eidotes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4800249"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800249">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “no man,” but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n4800250"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800250">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The law</i> is a reference to the law of Moses.</p></p>
<p id="n4800251"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faith in Jesus Christ.” A decision is difficult here. Though traditionally translated “faith in Jesus Christ,” an increasing number of NT scholars are arguing that <span class="greek">πίστις Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">pistis Christou</span>) and similar phrases in Paul (here and in v. 20; Rom 3:22, 26; Gal 3:22; Eph 3:12; Phil 3:9) involve a <i>subjective</i> genitive and mean “Christ’s faith” or “Christ’s faithfulness” (cf., e.g., G. Howard, “The ‘Faith of Christ’,” <i>ExpTim</i> 85 [1974]: 212-15; R. B. Hays, <i>The Faith of Jesus Christ</i> [SBLDS]; Morna D. Hooker, “<span class="greek">Πίστις Χριστοῦ</span>,” <i>NTS</i> 35 [1989]: 321-42). Noteworthy among the arguments for the subjective genitive view is that when <span class="greek">πίστις</span> takes a personal genitive it is almost never an objective genitive (cf. Matt 9:2, 22, 29; Mark 2:5; 5:34; 10:52; Luke 5:20; 7:50; 8:25, 48; 17:19; 18:42; 22:32; Rom 1:8; 12; 3:3; 4:5, 12, 16; 1 Cor 2:5; 15:14, 17; 2 Cor 10:15; Phil 2:17; Col 1:4; 2:5; 1 Thess 1:8; 3:2, 5, 10; 2 Thess 1:3; Titus 1:1; Phlm 6; 1 Pet 1:9, 21; 2 Pet 1:5). On the other hand, the <i>objective</i> genitive view has its adherents: A. Hultgren, “The <i>Pistis Christou</i> Formulations in Paul,” <i>NovT</i> 22 (1980): 248-63; J. D. G. Dunn, “Once More, <span class="greek">ΠΙΣΤΙΣ ΧΡΙΣΤΟΥ</span>,” <i>SBL Seminar Papers</i>, <i>1991,</i> 730-44. Most commentaries on Romans and Galatians usually side with the objective view. </p><p><b>sn</b> On the phrase translated <i>the faithfulness of Christ</i>, <i>ExSyn</i> 116, which notes that the grammar is not decisive, nevertheless suggests that “the faith/faithfulness of Christ is not a denial of faith <i>in</i> Christ as a Pauline concept (for the idea is expressed in many of the same contexts, only with the verb <span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> rather than the noun), but implies that the object of faith is a worthy object, for he himself is faithful.” Though Paul elsewhere teaches justification by faith, this presupposes that the object of our faith is reliable and worthy of such faith.</p></p>
<p id="n4800252"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800252">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> In Greek this is a continuation of the preceding sentence, but the construction is too long and complex for contemporary English style, so a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4800253"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800253">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “by faith in Christ.” See comment above on “the faithfulness of Jesus Christ.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800254"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800254">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “no human being”; <i>Grk</i> “flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800255"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800255">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “does Christ serve the interests of sin?”; or “is Christ an agent for sin?” See BDAG 230-31 s.v. <span class="greek">διάκονος</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4800256"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800256">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “once tore down.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800257"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800257">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “that I am a transgressor.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800258"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800258">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> The NA<sup>28</sup> Greek text, NRSV, NJB, TEV, HCSB, and a few others place the phrase “I have been crucified with Christ” at the end of v. 19, but most English translations place these words at the beginning of v. 20.</p></p>
<p id="n4800259"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800259">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “So” to bring out the connection of the following clauses with the preceding ones. What Paul says here amounts to a result or inference drawn from his co-crucifixion with Christ and the fact that Christ now lives in him. In Greek this is a continuation of the preceding sentence, but the construction is too long and complex for contemporary English style, so a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4800260"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800260">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800261"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800261">61</a> <p><b>tc</b> A number of significant witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B D* F G) have <span class="greek">θεοῦ καὶ Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">theou kai Christou</span>, “of God and Christ”) instead of <span class="greek">υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">huiou tou theou</span>, “the Son of God”), found in the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, including several important ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 33 1175 1241 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy co). The construction “of God and Christ” appears to be motivated as a more explicit affirmation of the deity of Christ (following as it apparently does the Granville Sharp rule). Although Paul certainly has an elevated Christology, explicit “God-talk” with reference to Jesus does not normally appear until the later books (cf., e.g., Titus 2:13, Phil 2:10-11, and probably Rom 9:5). For different arguments but the same textual conclusions, see <i>TCGNT</i> 524.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “I live by faith in the Son of God.” See note on “faithfulness of Jesus Christ” in v. 16 for the rationale behind the translation “the faithfulness of the Son of God.”</p><p><b>sn</b> On the phrase <i>because of the faithfulness of the Son of God</i>, <i>ExSyn</i> 116, which notes that the grammar is not decisive, nevertheless suggests that “the faith/faithfulness of Christ is not a denial of faith <i>in</i> Christ as a Pauline concept (for the idea is expressed in many of the same contexts, only with the verb <span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> rather than the noun), but implies that the object of faith is a worthy object, for he himself is faithful.” Though Paul elsewhere teaches justification by faith, this presupposes that the object of our faith is reliable and worthy of such faith.</p></p>
<p id="n4800262"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800262">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I do not declare invalid,” “I do not nullify.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800263"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800263">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “justification.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800264"><a href="file1141.xhtml#n4800264">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “without cause,” “for no purpose.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
