<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Ephesians 6</h2>
<p id="n490061"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n490061">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> The use of the article <span class="greek">τά</span> (<span class="translit">ta</span>) with <span class="greek">τέκνα</span> (<span class="translit">tekna</span>) functions in a generic way to distinguish this group from husbands, wives, fathers and slaves and is left, therefore, untranslated. The generic article is used with <span class="greek">γύναῖκες</span> (<span class="translit">gunaikes</span>) in 5:22, <span class="greek">ἄνδρες</span> (<span class="translit">andres</span>) in 5:25, <span class="greek">δοῦλοι</span> (<span class="translit">douloi</span>) in 6:5, and <span class="greek">κύριοι</span> (<span class="translit">kurioi</span>) in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n490062"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n490062">2</a> <p><b>tc</b> B D* F G as well as a few versional and patristic representatives lack “in the Lord” (<span class="greek">ἐν κυρίῳ</span>, <span class="translit">en kuriō</span>), while the phrase is well represented in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D<sup>1</sup> I<sup>vid</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 0285 33 1175 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy co. Scribes may have thought that the phrase could be regarded a qualifier on the kind of parents a child should obey (viz., only Christian parents), and would thus be tempted to delete the phrase to counter such an interpretation. It is unlikely that the phrase would have been added later, since the form used to express such sentiment in this <i>Haustafel</i> is <span class="greek">ὡς τῷ κυρίῳ</span>/<span class="greek">Χριστῷ</span> (<span class="translit">hōs tō kuriō</span>/<span class="translit">Christō</span>, “as to the Lord/Christ”; see 5:22; 6:5). Even though the witnesses for the omission are impressive, it is more likely that the phrase was deleted than added by scribal activity.</p></p>
<p id="n490063"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n490063">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 20:12 and Deut 5:16.</p></p>
<p id="n490064"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n490064">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “be.”</p></p>
<p id="n490065"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n490065">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will be.”</p></p>
<p id="n490066"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n490066">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 5:16.</p></p>
<p id="n490067"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n490067">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “Parents” (so TEV, CEV). The plural <span class="greek">οἱ πατέρες</span> (<span class="translit">hoi pateres</span>, “fathers”) can be used to refer to both the male and female parent (BDAG 786 s.v. <span class="greek">πατήρ</span> 1.b).</p></p>
<p id="n490068"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n490068">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “do not make your children angry.” BDAG 780 s.v. <span class="greek">παροργίζω</span> states “make angry.” The Greek verb in Col 3:21 is a different one with a slightly different nuance.</p></p>
<p id="n490069"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n490069">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “Servants” (KJV). Though <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) is often translated “servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. Also, many slaves in the Roman world became slaves through Rome’s subjugation of conquered nations, kidnapping, or by being born into slave households. </p></p>
<p id="n4900610"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the masters according to the flesh.” In the translation above, the article <span class="greek">τοῖς</span> (<span class="translit">tois</span>) governing <span class="greek">κυρίοις</span> (<span class="translit">kuriois</span>) is rendered in English as a possessive pronoun (i.e., “your”) and the prepositional phrase <span class="greek">κατὰ σάρκα</span> (<span class="translit">kata sarka</span>) is taken as modifying <span class="greek">κυρίοις</span> (indicating that the author is referring to <i>human</i> masters) and not modifying the imperative <span class="greek">ὑπακούετε</span> (<span class="translit">hupakouete</span>, which would indicate that obedience was according to a human standard or limitation). </p></p>
<p id="n4900611"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not according to eye-service.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900612"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the soul.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900613"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though the verb does not appear again at this point in the passage, it is nonetheless implied and supplied in the English translation for the sake of clarity. </p></p>
<p id="n4900614"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “serving as to the Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900615"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900615">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> The pronoun “<i>this</i>” (<span class="greek">τοῦτο</span>, <span class="translit">touto</span>) stands first in its clause for emphasis, and stresses the fact that God will reward those, who in seeking him, do good.</p></p>
<p id="n4900616"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4900617"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though the Greek text only has <span class="greek">αὐτούς</span> (<span class="translit">autous</span>, “them”), the antecedent is the slaves of the masters. Therefore, it was translated this way to make it explicit in English. </p></p>
<p id="n4900618"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do the same things to them.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900619"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “giving up the threat.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900620"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because of both they and you, the Lord is, in heaven…” </p></p>
<p id="n4900621"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “craftiness.” See BDAG 625 s.v. <span class="greek">μεθοδεία</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4900622"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900622">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 752 s.v. <span class="greek">πάλη</span> says, “<i>struggle against</i>…the opponent is introduced by <span class="greek">πρός</span> w. the acc.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900623"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900623">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “blood and flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900624"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 561 s.v. <span class="greek">κοσμοκράτωρ</span> suggests “the rulers of this sinful world” as a gloss. </p><p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>world-rulers of this darkness</i> does not refer to human rulers but the evil spirits that rule over the world. The phrase thus stands in apposition to what follows (<i>the spiritual forces of evil in the heavens</i>); see note on <i>heavens</i> at the end of this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4900625"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900625">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 837 s.v. <span class="greek">πνευματικός</span> 3 suggests “the spirit-forces of evil” in Ephesians 6:12. </p></p>
<p id="n4900626"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900626">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>spiritual forces of evil in the heavens</i> serves to emphasize the nature of the forces which oppose believers as well as to indicate the locality from which they originate.</p></p>
<p id="n4900627"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">ἀνθίστημι</span> (<span class="translit">anthistēmi</span>) carries the idea of resisting or opposing something or someone (BDAG 80 s.v.). In Eph 6:13, when used in combination with <span class="greek">στῆναι</span> (<span class="translit">stēnai</span>; cf. also <span class="greek">στῆτε</span> [<span class="translit">stēte</span>] in v. 14) and in a context of battle imagery, it seems to have the idea of resisting, standing firm, and being able to stand your ground. </p></p>
<p id="n4900628"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900628">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> The four participles <i>fastening…putting on…fitting…taking up…</i> indicate the <i>means</i> by which believers can take their stand against the devil and his schemes. The imperative <i>take</i> in v. 17 communicates another means by which to accomplish the standing, i.e., by the word of God.</p></p>
<p id="n4900629"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900629">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “girding your waist with truth.” In this entire section the author is painting a metaphor for his readers based on the attire of a Roman soldier prepared for battle and its similarity to the Christian prepared to do battle against spiritually evil forces. Behind the expression “<i>with truth</i>” is probably the genitive idea “belt of truth.” Since this is an appositional genitive (i.e., belt <i>which is</i> truth), the author simply left unsaid the idea of the belt and mentioned only his real focus, namely, the <i>truth</i>. (The analogy would have been completely understandable to his 1st century readers.) The idea of the belt is supplied in the translation to clarify the sense in English. </p></p>
<p id="n4900630"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The definite article <span class="greek">τοῖς</span> (<span class="translit">tois</span>) was taken as a possessive pronoun, i.e., “your,” since it refers to a part of the physical body.</p></p>
<p id="n4900631"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900631">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “gospel.” However, this is not a technical term here.</p></p>
<p id="n4900632"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in preparation of the gospel of peace.” The genitive <span class="greek">τοῦ εὐαγγελίου</span> (<span class="translit">tou euangeliou</span>) was taken as a genitive of source, i.e., “that comes from….”</p></p>
<p id="n4900633"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900633">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in everything.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900634"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900634">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek word translated <i>shield</i> (<span class="greek">θυρεός</span>, <span class="translit">thureos</span>) refers to the Roman soldier’s large rectangular wooden shield, called in Latin <i>scutum</i>, about 4 ft (1.2 m) high, covered with leather on the outside. Before a battle in which flaming arrows might be shot at them, the soldiers wet the leather covering with water to extinguish the arrows. The Roman legionaries could close ranks with these shields, the first row holding theirs edge to edge in front, and the rows behind holding the shields above their heads. In this formation they were practically invulnerable to arrows, rocks, and even spears.</p></p>
<p id="n4900635"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900635">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 59:17.</p></p>
<p id="n4900636"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900636">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek term translated <i>sword</i> (<span class="greek">μάχαιρα</span>, <span class="translit">machaira</span>) refers to the Roman <i>gladius</i>, a short sword about 2 ft (60 cm) long, used for close hand-to-hand combat. This is the only clearly offensive weapon in the list of armor mentioned by the author (he does not, for example, mention the lance [Latin <i>pilum</i>]).</p></p>
<p id="n4900637"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900637">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Both “pray” and “be alert” are participles in the Greek text (“praying…being alert”). Both are probably instrumental, loosely connected with all of the preceding instructions. As such, they are not additional commands to do but instead are the means through which the prior instructions are accomplished.</p></p>
<p id="n4900638"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900638">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and toward it.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900639"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900639">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> To avoid a lengthy, convoluted sentence in English, the Greek sentence was broken up at this point and the verb “pray” was inserted in the English translation to pick up the participle <span class="greek">προσευχόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">proseuxomenoi</span>, “praying”) in v. 18. </p></p>
<p id="n4900640"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900640">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that a word may be given to me in the opening of my mouth.” Here “word” (<span class="greek">λόγος</span>, <span class="translit">logos</span>) is used in the sense of “message,” but more specifically in this context, “the right words.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900641"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900641">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The infinitive <span class="greek">γνωρίσαι</span> (<span class="translit">gnōrisai</span>, “to make known”) is functioning epexegetically to further explain what the author means by the preceding phrase “that I may be given the right words when I begin to speak.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900642"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900642">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the.” The Greek article <span class="greek">ὁ</span> (<span class="translit">ho</span>) was translated with the possessive pronoun, “my.” See <i>ExSyn</i> 215. </p></p>
<p id="n4900643"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900643">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the things according to me.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900644"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900644">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the things concerning us.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900645"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900645">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” or “fellow Christians” as here (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited).</p></p>
<p id="n4900646"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900646">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900647"><a href="file1152.xhtml#n4900647">47</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> it sy) have <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”) at the end of the letter. Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. The earliest and best witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B F G 0278 6 33 81 1175 1739* 1881 sa) lack the particle, giving firm evidence that Ephesians did not originally conclude with <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “without corruption.” The term “love” is not found at the end of the sentence, but is supplied to clarify the sense in English. The term “undying” which modifies it captures the sense of the kind of love the author is referring to here. He is saying that God’s grace will be with those whose love for Jesus never ceases.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
