<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 7</h2>
<p id="n450071"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n450071">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n450072"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n450072">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here <i>person</i> refers to a human being.</p></p>
<p id="n450073"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n450073">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the,” with the article used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n450074"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n450074">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “husband.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Paul’s example of the <i>married woman</i> and the <i>law of the marriage</i> illustrates that death frees a person from obligation to the law. Thus, in spiritual terms, a person who has <i>died to what controlled us</i> (v. 6) has been released from the law to serve God in the new life produced by the Spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n450075"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n450075">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is a double connective here that cannot be easily preserved in English: “consequently therefore,” emphasizing the conclusion of what he has been arguing.</p></p>
<p id="n450076"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n450076">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the,” with the article used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n450077"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n450077">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n450078"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n450078">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that we might bear fruit to God.”</p></p>
<p id="n450079"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n450079">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, before we were in Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n4500710"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500710">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sinful passions.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500711"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500711">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “our members”; the words “of our body” have been supplied to clarify the meaning.</p></p>
<p id="n4500712"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500712">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having died.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποθανόντες</span> (<span class="translit">apothanontes</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4500713"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500713">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the newness of the Spirit and not in the oldness of the letter.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500714"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500714">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Romans 7:7-25</i>. There has been an enormous debate over the significance of the first person singular pronouns (“I”) in this passage and how to understand their referent. Did Paul intend (1) a reference to himself and other Christians too; (2) a reference to his own pre-Christian experience as a Jew, struggling with the law and sin (and thus addressing his fellow countrymen as Jews); or (3) a reference to himself as a child of Adam, reflecting the experience of Adam that is shared by both Jews and Gentiles alike (i.e., all people everywhere)? Good arguments can be assembled for each of these views, and each has problems dealing with specific statements in the passage. The classic argument against an autobiographical interpretation was made by W. G. Kümmel, <i>Römer 7 und die Bekehrung des Paulus</i>. A good case for seeing at least an autobiographical element in the chapter has been made by G. Theissen, <i>Psychologische Aspekte paulinischer Theologie</i> [FRLANT], 181-268. One major point that seems to favor some sort of an autobiographical reading of these verses is the lack of any mention of the Holy Spirit for empowerment in the struggle described in Rom 7:7-25. The Spirit is mentioned beginning in 8:1 as the solution to the problem of the struggle with sin (8:4-6, 9).</p></p>
<p id="n4500715"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500715">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I would not have known covetousness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500716"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500716">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 20:17 and Deut 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4500717"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500717">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “covetousness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500718"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500718">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “So” to indicate the result of the statement in the previous verse. Greek style often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” but English style generally does not.</p></p>
<p id="n4500719"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500719">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and there was found in/for me the commandment which was for life—this was for death.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500720"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and through it killed me.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500721"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500721">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “under sin.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500722"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500722">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but what I hate, this I do.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500723"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500723">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I agree with the law that it is good.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500724"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500724">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For to wish is present in/with me, but not to do it.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500725"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500725">25</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy) read “I give thanks to God” rather than “Now thanks be to God” (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> [B] <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 81 104 365 1506), the reading of NA<sup>28</sup>. The reading with the verb (<span class="greek">εὐχαριστῶ τῷ θεῷ</span>, <span class="translit">eucharistō tō theō</span>) possibly arose from a transcriptional error in which several letters were doubled (<i>TCGNT</i> 455). The conjunction <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>, “now”) is included in some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> as well (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 81 104 365 1506), but it should probably not be considered original. The ms support for the omission of <span class="greek">δέ</span> is both excellent and widespread (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B D 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy), and its addition can be explained as an insertion to smooth out the transition between v. 24 and 25.</p></p>
<p id="n4500726"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500726">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is a double connective here that cannot be easily preserved in English: “consequently therefore,” emphasizing the conclusion of what he has been arguing.</p></p>
<p id="n4500727"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500727">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Greek emphasizes the contrast between these two clauses more than can be easily expressed in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4500728"><a href="file1098.xhtml#n4500728">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “I serve” have been repeated here for clarity. </p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
