<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Expectation of Justification</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> <sup><a id="n450051" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n450051">1</a></sup> Therefore, since we have been declared righteous by faith, we have<sup><a id="n450052" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n450052">2</a></sup> peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, <span class="verse">5:2</span> through whom we have also obtained access<sup><a id="n450053" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n450053">3</a></sup> into this grace in which we stand, and we rejoice<sup><a id="n450054" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n450054">4</a></sup> in the hope of God’s glory. <span class="verse">5:3</span> Not<sup><a id="n450055" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n450055">5</a></sup> only this, but we also rejoice in sufferings, knowing that suffering produces endurance, <span class="verse">5:4</span> and endurance, character, and character, hope. <span class="verse">5:5</span> And hope does not disappoint, because the love of God<sup><a id="n450056" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n450056">6</a></sup> has been poured out<sup><a id="n450057" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n450057">7</a></sup> in our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:6</span> For while we were still helpless, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly. <span class="verse">5:7</span> (For rarely will anyone die for a righteous person, though for a good person perhaps someone might possibly dare to die.)<sup><a id="n450058" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n450058">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:8</span> But God demonstrates his own love for us, in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us. <span class="verse">5:9</span> Much more then, because we have now been declared righteous<sup><a id="n450059" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n450059">9</a></sup> by his blood,<sup><a id="n4500510" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500510">10</a></sup> we will be saved through him from God’s wrath.<sup><a id="n4500511" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500511">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:10</span> For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, how much more, since we have been reconciled, will we be saved by his life? <span class="verse">5:11</span> Not<sup><a id="n4500512" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500512">12</a></sup> only this, but we also rejoice<sup><a id="n4500513" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500513">13</a></sup> in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received this reconciliation. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Amplification of Justification </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:12</span> So then, just as sin entered the world through one man and death through sin, and so death spread to all people<sup><a id="n4500514" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500514">14</a></sup> because<sup><a id="n4500515" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500515">15</a></sup> all sinned— <span class="verse">5:13</span> for before the law was given,<sup><a id="n4500516" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500516">16</a></sup> sin was in the world, but there is no accounting for sin<sup><a id="n4500517" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500517">17</a></sup> when there is no law. <span class="verse">5:14</span> Yet death reigned from Adam until Moses even over those who did not sin in the same way that Adam (who is a type<sup><a id="n4500518" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500518">18</a></sup> of the coming one) transgressed.<sup><a id="n4500519" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500519">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:15</span> But the gracious gift is not like the transgression.<sup><a id="n4500520" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500520">20</a></sup> For if the many died through the transgression of the one man,<sup><a id="n4500521" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500521">21</a></sup> how much more did the grace of God and the gift by the grace of the one man Jesus Christ multiply to the many! <span class="verse">5:16</span> And the gift is not like the one who sinned.<sup><a id="n4500522" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500522">22</a></sup> For judgment, resulting from the one transgression,<sup><a id="n4500523" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500523">23</a></sup> led to condemnation, but<sup><a id="n4500524" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500524">24</a></sup> the gracious gift from the many failures<sup><a id="n4500525" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500525">25</a></sup> led to justification. <span class="verse">5:17</span> For if, by the transgression of the one man,<sup><a id="n4500526" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500526">26</a></sup> death reigned through the one, how much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one, Jesus Christ! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:18</span> Consequently,<sup><a id="n4500527" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500527">27</a></sup> just as condemnation<sup><a id="n4500528" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500528">28</a></sup> for all people<sup><a id="n4500529" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500529">29</a></sup> came<sup><a id="n4500530" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500530">30</a></sup> through one transgression,<sup><a id="n4500531" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500531">31</a></sup> so too through the one righteous act<sup><a id="n4500532" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500532">32</a></sup> came righteousness leading to life<sup><a id="n4500533" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500533">33</a></sup> for all people. <span class="verse">5:19</span> For just as through the disobedience of the one man<sup><a id="n4500534" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500534">34</a></sup> many<sup><a id="n4500535" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500535">35</a></sup> were constituted sinners, so also through the obedience of one man<sup><a id="n4500536" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500536">36</a></sup> many<sup><a id="n4500537" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500537">37</a></sup> will be constituted righteous. <span class="verse">5:20</span> Now the law came in<sup><a id="n4500538" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500538">38</a></sup> so that the transgression<sup><a id="n4500539" href="file1096_notes.xhtml#n4500539">39</a></sup> may increase, but where sin increased, grace multiplied all the more, <span class="verse">5:21</span> so that just as sin reigned in death, so also grace will reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. </p>

</body>
</html>