<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n580131"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n580131">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a vague allusion to people described in scripture and extra-biblical literature and may include Abraham and Sarah (Gen 18:2-15), Lot (Gen 19:1-14), Gideon (Judg 6:11-18), Manoah (Judg 13:3-22), and possibly Tobit (Tob 12:1-20).</p></p>
<p id="n580132"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n580132">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as being imprisoned together.”</p></p>
<p id="n580133"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n580133">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “since you too are vulnerable”; <i>Grk</i> “you also being in the body.”</p></p>
<p id="n580134"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n580134">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 31:6, 8.</p></p>
<p id="n580135"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n580135">5</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* C* P 0285<sup>vid</sup> 33 1175 1739 lat) lack <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>), but because the omission conforms to the wording of Ps 118:6 (117:6 LXX), it is suspect.</p></p>
<p id="n580136"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n580136">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 118:6.</p></p>
<p id="n580137"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n580137">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by diverse and strange teachings.”</p></p>
<p id="n580138"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n580138">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “foods,” referring to the meals associated with the OT sacrifices (see the contrast with the next verse; also 9:9-10; 10:1, 4, 11).</p></p>
<p id="n580139"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n580139">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whose blood is brought by the high priest.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801310"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his abuse.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801311"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “neglect doing good and fellowship.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801312"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “as ones who will give an account”; <i>Grk</i> “as giving an account.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801313"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that they may do this.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801314"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I urge you to do this all the more.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801315"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801315">15</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (C P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 6 629* 630 1505 <i>pm</i> latt sy<sup>h</sup>) read <span class="greek">ὑμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">humin</span>, “in you”) here, but <span class="greek">ἡμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">hēmin</span>) has stronger external support (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D<sup>vid</sup> K 0243 0285 33 81 104 326 365 629<sup>c</sup> 1175 1739 1881 <i>pm</i> sy<sup>p</sup> co). It is also more likely that <span class="greek">ἡμῖν</span> would have been changed to <span class="greek">ὑμῖν</span> in light of the “you” which occurs at the beginning of the verse than vice versa.</p></p>
<p id="n5801316"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801316">16</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A [C*] 0243 0285 33 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt) include the words “and ever” here, but the shorter reading (supported by <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> C<sup>3</sup> D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 6 104 365 1505 <i>al</i>) is preferred on internal grounds. It seemed more likely that scribes would assimilate the wording to the common NT doxological expression “for ever and ever,” found especially in the Apocalypse (cf., e.g., 1 Tim 1:17; 2 Tim 4:18; Rev 4:9; 22:5) than to the “forever” of Heb 13:8. Nevertheless, a decision is difficult here. NA<sup>28</sup> places the phrase in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n5801317"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n5801318"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Know that” (an imperative).</p></p>
<p id="n5801319"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has been released, with whom, if he comes soon, I will see you.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801320"><a href="file1204.xhtml#n5801320">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including several significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A C D H <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0243 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy bo), conclude the letter with <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”). Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Further, there is sufficient testimony (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* I<sup>vid</sup> 6 33 sa) for the lack of the particle, rendering its omission the preferred reading. </p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
