<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 21</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 21</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Triumphal Entry </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:1</span> Now<sup><a id="n400211" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n400211">1</a></sup> when they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage,<sup><a id="n400213" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n400213">3</a></sup> at the Mount of Olives,<sup><a id="n400214" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n400214">4</a></sup> Jesus sent two disciples, <span class="verse">21:2</span> telling them, “Go to the village ahead of you.<sup><a id="n400215" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n400215">5</a></sup> Right away you will find a donkey tied there, and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them to me. <span class="verse">21:3</span> If anyone says anything to you, you are to say, ‘The Lord needs them,’<sup><a id="n400216" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n400216">6</a></sup> and he will send them at once.” <span class="verse">21:4</span> This<sup><a id="n400217" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n400217">7</a></sup> took place to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet:<sup><a id="n400218" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n400218">8</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">21:5</span> “<b><i>Tell the people of Zion,</i></b><sup><a id="n400219" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n400219">9</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry">‘<b><i>Look, your king is coming to you,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>unassuming and seated on a donkey,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>and on a colt, the foal of a donkey</b></i>.’”<sup><a id="n4002110" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002110">10</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:6</span> So<sup><a id="n4002111" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002111">11</a></sup> the disciples went and did as Jesus had instructed them. <span class="verse">21:7</span> They brought the donkey and the colt and placed their cloaks<sup><a id="n4002112" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002112">12</a></sup> on them, and he sat on them. <span class="verse">21:8</span> A<sup><a id="n4002113" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002113">13</a></sup> very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road. Others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road. <span class="verse">21:9</span> The crowds that went ahead of him and those following kept shouting,<sup><a id="n4002114" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002114">14</a></sup> “<i>Hosanna</i><sup><a id="n4002115" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002115">15</a></sup> to the Son of David! <b><i>Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!</i></b><sup><a id="n4002116" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002116">16</a></sup> <i>Hosanna</i> in the highest!” <span class="verse">21:10</span> As he entered Jerusalem the whole city was thrown into an uproar,<sup><a id="n4002117" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002117">17</a></sup> saying, “Who is this?” <span class="verse">21:11</span> And the crowds were saying, “This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazareth in Galilee.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Cleansing the Temple </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:12</span> Then<sup><a id="n4002119" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002119">19</a></sup> Jesus entered the temple area<sup><a id="n4002120" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002120">20</a></sup> and drove out all those who were selling and buying in the temple courts,<sup><a id="n4002121" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002121">21</a></sup> and turned over the tables of the money changers and the chairs of those selling doves. <span class="verse">21:13</span> And he said to them, “It is written, ‘<b><i>My house will be called a house of prayer,</i></b>’<sup><a id="n4002122" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002122">22</a></sup> but you are turning it into <b><i>a den</i></b><sup><a id="n4002123" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002123">23</a></sup> <b><i>of robbers</i></b>!”<sup><a id="n4002124" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002124">24</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:14</span> The blind and lame came to him in the temple courts, and he healed them. <span class="verse">21:15</span> But when the chief priests and the experts in the law<sup><a id="n4002125" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002125">25</a></sup> saw the wonderful things he did and heard the children crying out in the temple courts,<sup><a id="n4002126" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002126">26</a></sup> “Hosanna to the Son of David,” they became indignant <span class="verse">21:16</span> and said to him, “Do you hear what they are saying?” Jesus said to them, “Yes. Have you never read, ‘<b><i>Out of the mouths of children and nursing infants you have prepared praise for yourself</i></b>’?”<sup><a id="n4002127" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002127">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">21:17</span> And leaving them, he went out of the city to Bethany and spent the night there. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Withered Fig Tree</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:18</span> Now early in the morning, as he returned to the city, he was hungry. <span class="verse">21:19</span> After noticing a fig tree<sup><a id="n4002128" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002128">28</a></sup> by the road he went to it, but found nothing on it except leaves. He said to it, “Never again will there be fruit from you!” And the fig tree withered at once. <span class="verse">21:20</span> When the disciples saw it they were amazed, saying, “How did the fig tree wither so quickly?” <span class="verse">21:21</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4002129" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002129">29</a></sup> answered them, “I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4002130" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002130">30</a></sup> if you have faith and do not doubt, not only will you do what was done to the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ it will happen. <span class="verse">21:22</span> And whatever you ask in prayer, if you believe,<sup><a id="n4002131" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002131">31</a></sup> you will receive.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Authority of Jesus </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:23</span> Now after Jesus<sup><a id="n4002132" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002132">32</a></sup> entered the temple courts,<sup><a id="n4002133" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002133">33</a></sup> the chief priests and elders of the people came up to him as he was teaching and said, “By what authority<sup><a id="n4002134" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002134">34</a></sup> are you doing these things, and who gave you this authority?” <span class="verse">21:24</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4002135" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002135">35</a></sup> answered them, “I will also ask you one question. If you answer me then I will also tell you by what authority I do these things. <span class="verse">21:25</span> Where did John’s baptism come from? From heaven or from people?”<sup><a id="n4002136" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002136">36</a></sup> They discussed this among themselves, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Then why did you not believe him?’ <span class="verse">21:26</span> But if we say, ‘From people,’ we fear the crowd, for they all consider John to be a prophet.” <span class="verse">21:27</span> So<sup><a id="n4002137" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002137">37</a></sup> they answered Jesus,<sup><a id="n4002138" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002138">38</a></sup> “We don’t know.”<sup><a id="n4002139" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002139">39</a></sup> Then he said to them, “Neither will I tell you<sup><a id="n4002140" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002140">40</a></sup> by what authority<sup><a id="n4002141" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002141">41</a></sup> I am doing these things. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Two Sons</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:28</span> “What<sup><a id="n4002142" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002142">42</a></sup> do you think? A man had two sons. He went to the first and said, ‘Son, go and work in the vineyard today.’ <span class="verse">21:29</span> The boy answered,<sup><a id="n4002143" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002143">43</a></sup> ‘I will not.’ But later he had a change of heart<sup><a id="n4002144" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002144">44</a></sup> and went. <span class="verse">21:30</span> The father<sup><a id="n4002145" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002145">45</a></sup> went to the other son and said the same thing. This boy answered,<sup><a id="n4002146" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002146">46</a></sup> ‘I will, sir,’ but did not go. <span class="verse">21:31</span> Which of the two did his father’s will?” They said, “The first.”<sup><a id="n4002147" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002147">47</a></sup> Jesus said to them, “I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4002148" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002148">48</a></sup> tax collectors<sup><a id="n4002149" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002149">49</a></sup> and prostitutes will go ahead of you into the kingdom of God! <span class="verse">21:32</span> For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him. But the tax collectors and prostitutes did believe. Although<sup><a id="n4002150" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002150">50</a></sup> you saw this, you did not later change your minds<sup><a id="n4002151" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002151">51</a></sup> and believe him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Tenants </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:33</span> “Listen to another parable: There was a landowner<sup><a id="n4002152" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002152">52</a></sup> who planted a vineyard.<sup><a id="n4002153" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002153">53</a></sup> He put a fence around it, dug a pit for its winepress, and built a watchtower. Then<sup><a id="n4002154" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002154">54</a></sup> he leased it to tenant farmers<sup><a id="n4002155" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002155">55</a></sup> and went on a journey. <span class="verse">21:34</span> When the harvest time was near, he sent his slaves<sup><a id="n4002156" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002156">56</a></sup> to the tenants to collect his portion of the crop.<sup><a id="n4002157" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002157">57</a></sup> <span class="verse">21:35</span> But the tenants seized his slaves, beat one,<sup><a id="n4002158" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002158">58</a></sup> killed another, and stoned another. <span class="verse">21:36</span> Again he sent other slaves, more than the first, and they treated them the same way. <span class="verse">21:37</span> Finally he sent his son to them,<sup><a id="n4002159" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002159">59</a></sup> saying, ‘They will respect my son.’ <span class="verse">21:38</span> But when the tenants saw the son, they said to themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let’s kill him and get his inheritance!’ <span class="verse">21:39</span> So<sup><a id="n4002160" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002160">60</a></sup> they seized him,<sup><a id="n4002161" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002161">61</a></sup> threw him out of the vineyard,<sup><a id="n4002162" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002162">62</a></sup> and killed him. <span class="verse">21:40</span> Now when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?” <span class="verse">21:41</span> They said to him, “He will utterly destroy those evil men! Then he will lease the vineyard to other tenants who will give him his portion at the harvest.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:42</span> Jesus said to them, “Have you never read in the scriptures: </p>
<p class="otpoetry">‘<i><b>The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone</b></i>.<sup><a id="n4002163" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002163">63</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>This is from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes</i></b>’?<sup><a id="n4002164" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002164">64</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">21:43</span> For this reason I tell you that the kingdom of God will be taken from you and given to a people<sup><a id="n4002165" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002165">65</a></sup> who will produce its fruit. <span class="verse">21:44</span> The one who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, and the one on whom it falls will be crushed.”<sup><a id="n4002166" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002166">66</a></sup> <span class="verse">21:45</span> When<sup><a id="n4002167" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002167">67</a></sup> the chief priests and the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4002168" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002168">68</a></sup> heard his parables, they realized that he was speaking about them. <span class="verse">21:46</span> They wanted to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowds, because the crowds<sup><a id="n4002169" href="file990_notes.xhtml#n4002169">69</a></sup> regarded him as a prophet. </p>

</body>
</html>