<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Mark 13</h2>
<p id="n410131"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n410131">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n410132"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n410132">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n410133"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n410133">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Jerusalem <i>temple</i> was widely admired around the world. See Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 15.11 [15.380-425]; <i>J. W</i>. 5.5 [5.184-227] and Tacitus, <i>History</i> 5.8, who called it “immensely opulent.” Josephus compared it to a beautiful snowcapped mountain.</p></p>
<p id="n410134"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n410134">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> With the statement <i>not one stone will be left on another</i> Jesus predicted the total destruction of the temple, something that did occur in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 70.</p></p>
<p id="n410135"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n410135">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not one stone will be left here on another which will not be thrown down.”</p></p>
<p id="n410136"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n410136">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410137"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n410137">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and James and John,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n410138"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n410138">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> Both references to <i>these things</i> are plural, so more than the temple’s destruction is in view. The question may presuppose that such a catastrophe signals the end.</p></p>
<p id="n410139"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n410139">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Be on guard.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101310"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “I am the Messiah.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101311"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it is not yet the end.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101312"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation “rise up in arms” see L&amp;N 55.2.</p></p>
<p id="n4101313"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101313">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Isa 5:13-14; 13:6-16; Hag 2:6-7; Zech 14:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4101314"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They will hand you over.” “They” is an indefinite plural, referring to people in general. The parallel in Matt 10:17 makes this explicit.</p></p>
<p id="n4101315"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101315">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Councils</i> in this context has a non-technical sense referring to local judicial bodies (courts) attached to the Jewish synagogue (cf. BDAG 967 s.v. <span class="greek">συνέδριον</span> 1.a). These courts would be responsible for meting out justice and discipline within the Jewish community.</p></p>
<p id="n4101316"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101316">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 1:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4101317"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101317">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> These statements look at persecution both from a Jewish context as the mention of <i>councils</i> and <i>synagogues</i> suggests, and from a Gentile one as the reference to <i>governors and kings</i> suggests. Some fulfillment of Jewish persecution can be seen in Acts.</p></p>
<p id="n4101318"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “hand you over into custody,” in particular “as a t.t. of police and courts ‘hand over into [the] custody [of]’” (BDAG 762 s.v. <span class="greek">παραδίδωμι</span> 1.b). In context some sort of trial is implied (cf. Luke 12:11).</p></p>
<p id="n4101319"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in that hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101320"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will rebel against.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101321"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101321">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> See 1 Cor 1:25-31.</p></p>
<p id="n4101322"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101322">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>But the one who endures to the end will be saved</i>. Jesus was not claiming here that salvation is by works, because he had already taught that it is by grace (cf. 10:15). He was simply arguing that genuine faith evidences itself in persistence through even the worst of trials. </p></p>
<p id="n4101323"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101323">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> The reference to <i>the abomination of desolation</i> is an allusion to Dan 9:27. Though some have seen the fulfillment of Daniel’s prophecy in the actions of Antiochus IV (or a representative of his) in 167 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span>, the words of Jesus seem to indicate that Antiochus was not the final fulfillment, but that there was (from Jesus’ perspective) still another fulfillment yet to come. Some argue that this was realized in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 70, while others claim that it refers specifically to Antichrist and will not be fully realized until the period of the great tribulation at the end of the age (cf. Mark 13:19, 24; Matt 24:21; Rev 3:10). </p></p>
<p id="n4101324"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “he.” Those who see the participle <span class="greek">ἑστηκότα</span> as masculine singular generally understand it to refer to the individual known as the Antichrist, often citing 2 Thess 2:3-4 as a related passage. By grammatical form the participle <span class="greek">ἑστηκότα</span> can also be neuter plural, however, and this is sometimes interpreted as referring to various abominations or atrocities committed during the intertestamental period, or to a statue set up in the temple, or to an altar constructed on top of the altar of burnt offering for the purpose of pagan sacrifices. Each of these views is not without difficulties. Confining the issue merely to the grammatical problem, the interpreter is forced to choose between a discrepancy in grammatical <i>gender</i> (the participle <span class="greek">ἑστηκότα</span> is <i>masculine</i> singular but the word it modifies, <span class="greek">βδέλυγμα</span>, is <i>neuter</i> singular) or a discrepancy in <i>number</i> (the participle <span class="greek">ἑστηκότα</span> is neuter <i>plural</i> but the word it modifies, <span class="greek">βδέλυγμα</span>, is neuter <i>singular</i>. Given that the issue is one of grammatical gender, however, it is still possible for the neuter head noun (<span class="greek">βδέλυγμα</span>) to refer to a masculine individual rather than a set of circumstances or a thing. The present translation uses “it” for the following pronoun, allowing a degree of ambiguity to remain for the English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4101325"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101325">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> This parenthetical comment is generally regarded as a command by the author made directly to the readers, not as part of Jesus’ original speech. For this reason the statement is not placed within quotation marks.</p></p>
<p id="n4101326"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101326">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> Fleeing <i>to the mountains</i> is a key OT image: Gen 19:17; Judg 6:2; Isa 15:5; Jer 16:16; Zech 14:5.</p></p>
<p id="n4101327"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101327">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> Most of the roofs in the NT were flat roofs made of pounded dirt, sometimes mixed with lime or stones, supported by heavy wooden beams. They generally had an easy means of access, either a sturdy wooden ladder or stone stairway, sometimes on the outside of the house. </p></p>
<p id="n4101328"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101328">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> The nature of the judgment coming upon them will be so quick and devastating that one will not have time to <i>come down or go inside to take anything out of his house</i>. It is best just to escape as quickly as possible. </p></p>
<p id="n4101329"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “tribulation.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101330"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101330">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Suffering unlike anything that has happened</i>. Some refer this event to the destruction of Jerusalem in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 70. While the events of <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 70 may reflect somewhat the comments Jesus makes here, the reference to the scope and severity of this judgment strongly suggest that much more is in view. Most likely Jesus is referring to the great end-time judgment on Jerusalem in the great tribulation.</p></p>
<p id="n4101331"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101331">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the days.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101332"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101332">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101333"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101333">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 8:29.</p></p>
<p id="n4101334"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101334">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “false christs”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101335"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101335">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “tribulation.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101338"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101338">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 13:10; 34:4 (LXX); Joel 2:10. The heavens were seen as the abode of heavenly forces, so their shaking indicates distress in the spiritual realm. Although some take <i>the powers</i> as a reference to bodies in the heavens (like stars and planets, “the heavenly bodies,” NIV) this is not as likely.</p></p>
<p id="n4101339"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101339">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101340"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101340">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Dan 7:13. Here is Jesus returning with full judging authority.</p></p>
<p id="n4101341"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101341">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of the sky”; the Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) may be translated “sky” or “heaven,” depending on the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4101342"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101342">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">γινώσκετε</span> (<span class="translit">ginōskete</span>, “know”) can be parsed as either present indicative or present imperative. In this context the imperative fits better, since the movement is from analogy (trees and seasons) to the future (the signs of the coming of the kingdom) and since the emphasis is on preparation for this event.</p></p>
<p id="n4101343"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101343">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101344"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101344">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is one of the hardest verses in the gospels to interpret. Various views exist for what <i>generation</i> means. (1) Some take it as meaning “race” and thus as an assurance that the Jewish race (nation) will not pass away. But it is very questionable that the Greek term <span class="greek">γενεά</span> (<span class="translit">genea</span>) can have this meaning. Two other options are possible. (2) <i>Generation</i> might mean “this type of generation” and refer to the generation of wicked humanity. Then the point is that humanity will not perish, because God will redeem it. Or (3) <i>generation</i> may refer to “the generation that sees the signs of the end” (v. 26), who will also see the end itself. In other words, once the movement to the return of Christ starts, all the events connected with it happen very quickly, in rapid succession.</p></p>
<p id="n4101345"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101345">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>words</i> that Jesus predicts here <i>will never pass away</i>. They are more stable and lasting than creation itself! For this kind of image, see Isa 40:8; 55:10-11.</p></p>
<p id="n4101346"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101346">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>nor the Son</i> has caused a great deal of theological debate because on the surface it appears to conflict with the concept of Jesus’ deity. The straightforward meaning of the text is that the Son does not know the time of his return. If Jesus were divine, though, wouldn’t he know this information? There are other passages which similarly indicate that Jesus did not know certain things. For example, Luke 2:52 indicates that Jesus grew in wisdom; this has to mean that Jesus did not know everything all the time but learned as he grew. So Mark 13:32 is not alone in implying that Jesus did not know certain things. The best option for understanding Mark 13:32 and similar passages is to hold the two concepts in tension: The Son in his earthly life and ministry had limited knowledge of certain things, yet he was still deity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101347"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101347">47</a> <p><b>tc</b> The vast majority of witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C L W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy co) have <span class="greek">καὶ προσεύχεσθε</span> after <span class="greek">ἀγρυπνεῖτε</span> (<span class="translit">agrupneite kai proseuchesthe</span>, “stay alert and pray”). This may be a motivated reading, influenced by the similar command in Mark 14:38 where <span class="greek">προσεύχεσθε</span> is solidly attested, and more generally from the parallel in Luke 21:36 (though <span class="greek">δέομαι</span> [<span class="translit">deomai</span>, “ask”] is used there). As B. M. Metzger notes, it is a predictable variant that scribes would have been likely to produce independently of each other (<i>TCGNT</i> 95). The words are not found in B D a c d k. Although the external evidence for the shorter reading is slender, it probably better accounts for the longer reading than vice versa.</p></p>
<p id="n4101348"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101348">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 10:44.</p></p>
<p id="n4101349"><a href="file1011.xhtml#n4101349">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “giving.” </p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
