<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 8</h2>
<p id="n450081"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n450081">1</a> <p><b>tc</b> The earliest and best witnesses of the Alexandrian and Western texts, as well as a few others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B D* F G 6 1506 1739 1881 co), have no additional words for v. 1. Later scribes (A D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 81 365 629 vg) added the words <span class="greek">μὴ κατὰ σάρκα περιπατοῦσιν</span> (<span class="translit">mē kata sarka peripatousin</span>, “who do not walk according to the flesh”), while even later ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D<sup>2</sup> 33<sup>vid</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) added <span class="greek">ἀλλὰ κατὰ πνεῦμα</span> (<span class="translit">alla kata pneuma</span>, “but [who do walk] according to the Spirit”). Both the external evidence and the internal evidence are compelling for the shortest reading. The scribes were evidently motivated to add such qualifications (interpolated from v. 4) to insulate Paul’s gospel from charges that it was characterized too much by grace. The KJV follows the longest reading found in <span class="apparatus">M</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n450082"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n450082">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the law of the Spirit of life.”</p></p>
<p id="n450083"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n450083">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> read the first person singular pronoun <span class="greek">με</span> (<span class="translit">me</span>) here (A D 1175 1241 1505 1739<sup>c</sup> 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sa). The second person singular pronoun <span class="greek">σε</span> (<span class="translit">se</span>) is superior because of external support (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B (F: <span class="greek">σαι</span>) G 1506* 1739*) and internal support (it is the harder reading since ch. 7 was narrated in the first person). At the same time, it could have arisen via dittography from the final syllable of the verb preceding it (<span class="greek">ἠλευθέρωσεν</span>, <span class="translit">ēleutherōsen</span>; “has set free”). But for this to happen in such early and diverse witnesses is unlikely, especially as it depends on various scribes repeatedly overlooking either the <i>nu</i> or the <i>nu</i>-bar at the end of the verb.</p></p>
<p id="n450084"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n450084">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in that.”</p></p>
<p id="n450085"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n450085">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “think on” or “are intent on” (twice in this verse). What is in view here is not primarily preoccupation, however, but worldview. Translations like “set their mind on” could be misunderstood by the typical English reader to refer exclusively to preoccupation.</p></p>
<p id="n450086"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n450086">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “mindset,” “way of thinking” (twice in this verse and once in v. 7). The Greek term <span class="greek">φρόνημα</span> does not refer to one’s mind, but to one’s outlook or mindset.</p></p>
<p id="n450087"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n450087">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “are not controlled by the flesh but by the Spirit.”</p></p>
<p id="n450088"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n450088">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Greek emphasizes the contrast between these two clauses more than can be easily expressed in English.</p></p>
<p id="n450089"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n450089">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “life-giving.” <i>Grk</i> “the Spirit is life.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500810"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500810">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The one who raised Jesus from the dead</i> refers to God (also in the following clause).</p></p>
<p id="n4500811"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500811">11</a> <p><b>tc</b> Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> read <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦν</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsoun</span>, “Jesus”) after <span class="greek">Χριστόν</span> (<span class="translit">Christon</span>, “Christ”; <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A D* 630 1506 1739 1881 bo); C 81 104 lat have <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦν Χριστόν</span>. The shorter reading is more likely to be autographic, though, both because of external evidence (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> B D<sup>2</sup> F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1241 1505 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sa) and internal evidence (scribes were much more likely to add the name “Jesus” if it were lacking than to remove it if it were already present in the text, especially to harmonize with the earlier mention of Jesus in the verse).</p></p>
<p id="n4500812"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500812">12</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1241 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat) have <span class="greek">διά</span> (<span class="translit">dia</span>) followed by the accusative: “because of his Spirit who lives in you.” The genitive “through his Spirit” is supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C 81 104 1505 1506 <i>al</i>, and is slightly preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4500813"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500813">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is a double connective here that cannot be easily preserved in English: “consequently therefore,” emphasizing the conclusion of what he has been arguing.</p></p>
<p id="n4500814"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500814">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4500815"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “are about to, are certainly going to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500816"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500816">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> This remark is parenthetical to Paul’s argument.</p></p>
<p id="n4500817"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500817">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For as many as are being led by the Spirit of God, these are.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500818"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500818">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “slavery again to fear.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500819"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500819">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">υἱοθεσία</span> (<span class="translit">huiothesia</span>) was originally a legal technical term for adoption as a son with full rights of inheritance. BDAG 1024 s.v. notes, “a legal t.t. of ‘adoption’ of children, in our lit., i.e. in Paul, only in a transferred sense of a transcendent filial relationship between God and humans (with the legal aspect, not gender specificity, as major semantic component).”</p></p>
<p id="n4500820"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500820">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in that.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500821"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500821">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “<i>Abba</i>” is the Greek transliteration of the Aramaic <span class="hebrew">&#8207;אַבָּא&#8206;</span> (<span class="translit">’abba’</span>), literally meaning “my father” but taken over simply as “father,” used in prayer and in the family circle, and later taken over by the early Greek-speaking Christians (BDAG 1 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀββα</span>).</p><p><b>sn</b> This Aramaic word is found three times in the New Testament (Mark 14:36; Rom 8:15; Gal 4:6), and in each case is followed by its Greek equivalent, which is translated “father.” It is a term expressing warm affection and filial confidence. It has no perfect equivalent in English. It has passed into European languages as an ecclesiastical term, “abbot.” Over the past fifty years a lot has been written about this term and Jesus’ use of it. Joachim Jeremias argued that Jesus routinely addressed God using this Aramaic word, and he also noted this was a “child’s word,” leading many to conclude its modern equivalent was “Daddy.” This conclusion Jeremias soon modified (the term on occasion is used of an adult son addressing his father) but the simplistic equation of <i>abba</i> with “Daddy” is still heard in some circles today. Nevertheless, the term does express a high degree of closeness with reverence, and in addition to the family circle could be used by disciples of a much loved and revered teacher.</p></p>
<p id="n4500822"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500822">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “with.” <i>ExSyn</i> 160-61, however, notes the following: “At issue, grammatically, is whether the Spirit testifies <i>alongside of</i> our spirit (dat. of association), or whether he testifies <i>to our spirit</i> (indirect object) that we are God’s children. If the former, the one receiving this testimony is unstated (is it God? or believers?). If the latter, the believer receives the testimony and hence is assured of salvation via the inner witness of the Spirit. The first view has the advantage of a <span class="greek">σύν</span>- (<span class="translit">sun</span>-) prefixed verb, which might be expected to take an accompanying dat. of association (and is supported by NEB, JB, etc.). But there are three reasons why <span class="greek">πνεύματι</span> (<span class="translit">pneumati</span>) should <i>not</i> be taken as association: (1) Grammatically, a dat. with a <span class="greek">σύν</span>- prefixed verb does not necessarily indicate association. This, of course, does not preclude such here, but this fact at least opens up the alternatives in this text. (2) Lexically, though <span class="greek">συμμαρτυρέω</span> (<span class="translit">summartureō</span>) originally bore an associative idea, it developed in the direction of merely intensifying <span class="greek">μαρτυρέω</span> (<span class="translit">martureō</span>). This is surely the case in the only other NT text with a dat. (Rom 9:1). (3) Contextually, a dat. of association does not seem to support Paul’s argument: ‘What standing has our spirit in <i>this</i> matter? Of itself it surely has no right at all to testify to our being sons of God’ [C. E. B. Cranfield, <i>Romans</i> [ICC], 1:403]. In sum, Rom 8:16 seems to be secure as a text in which the believer’s assurance of salvation is based on the inner witness of the Spirit. The implications of this for one’s soteriology are profound: The objective data, as helpful as they are, cannot by themselves provide <i>assurance</i> of salvation; the believer also needs (and receives) an existential, ongoing encounter with God’s Spirit in order to gain that familial comfort.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500823"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500823">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on the one hand, heirs of God; on the other hand, fellow heirs with Christ.” Some prefer to render v. 17 as follows: “And if children, then heirs—that is, heirs of God. Also fellow heirs with Christ if indeed we suffer with him so we may also be glorified with him.” Such a translation suggests two distinct inheritances, one coming to all of God’s children, the other coming only to those who suffer with Christ. The difficulty of this view, however, is that it ignores the correlative conjunctions <span class="greek">μέν</span>…<span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">men</span>…<span class="translit">de</span>, “on the one hand…on the other hand”): The construction strongly suggests that the inheritances cannot be separated since both explain “then heirs.” For this reason, the preferred translation puts this explanation in parentheses.</p></p>
<p id="n4500824"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500824">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “are not worthy [to be compared].”</p></p>
<p id="n4500825"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500825">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because of the one”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4500826"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500826">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who have the Spirit as firstfruits.” The genitive <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> (<span class="translit">pneumatos</span>) can be understood here as possessive (“the firstfruits belonging to the Spirit”) although it is much more likely that this is a genitive of apposition (“the firstfruits, namely, the Spirit”); cf. TEV, NLT. </p></p>
<p id="n4500827"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500827">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on “adoption” in v. 15.</p></p>
<p id="n4500828"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500828">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “body.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500829"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500829">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “perseverance.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500830"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500830">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for we do not know what we ought to pray for.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500831"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500831">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He</i> refers to God here; Paul has not specifically identified him for the sake of rhetorical power (for by leaving the subject slightly ambiguous, he draws his audience into seeing God’s hand in places where he is not explicitly mentioned).</p></p>
<p id="n4500832"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500832">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he,” or “it”; the referent (the Spirit) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4500833"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500833">33</a> <p><b>tc</b> <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span> (<span class="translit">ho theos</span>, “God”) is found after the verb <span class="greek">συνεργεῖ</span> (<span class="translit">sunergei</span>, “work”) in v. 28 in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> A B 81 sa; the shorter reading is found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1241 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy bo. Although the inclusion is supported by a significant early papyrus, the alliance of significant Alexandrian and Western witnesses favors the shorter reading. As well, the longer reading is evidently motivated by a need for clarification. Since <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span> is textually suspect, it is better to read the text without it. This leaves two good translational options: either “he works all things together for good” or “all things work together for good.” In the first instance the subject is embedded in the verb and “God” is clearly implied (as in v. 29). In the second instance, <span class="greek">πάντα</span> (<span class="translit">panta</span>) becomes the subject of an intransitive verb. In either case, “What is expressed is a truly biblical confidence in the sovereignty of God” (C. E. B. Cranfield, <i>Romans</i> [ICC], 1:427).</p></p>
<p id="n4500834"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500834">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God’s Son) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4500835"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500835">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4500836"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500836">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “[he] who.” The relative clause continues the question of v. 31 in a way that is awkward in English. The force of v. 32 is thus: “who indeed did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all—How will he not also with him give us all things?”</p></p>
<p id="n4500837"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500837">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 50:8 where the reference is singular; Paul applies this to all believers (“God’s <i>elect</i>” is plural here).</p></p>
<p id="n4500838"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500838">38</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ A number of significant and early witnesses, along with several others (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C F G L <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 6 33 81 104 365 1505 <i>al</i> lat bo), read <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsous</span>, “Jesus”) after <span class="greek">Χριστός</span> (<span class="translit">Christos</span>, “Christ”) in v. 34. But the shorter reading is not unrepresented (B D 0289 1175 1241 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sa). Once <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span> got into the text, what scribe would omit it? Although the external evidence is on the side of the longer reading, internally such an expansion seems suspect. The shorter reading is thus preferred. NA<sup>28</sup> has the word in brackets, indicating doubt as to its authenticity.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who also.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500839"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500839">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here “sword” is a metonymy that includes both threats of violence and acts of violence, even including death (although death is not necessarily the only thing in view here).</p></p>
<p id="n4500840"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500840">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 44:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4500841"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500841">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1034 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑπερνικάω</span> states, “as a heightened form of <span class="greek">νικᾶν</span> <i>prevail completely</i> <span class="greek">ὑπερνικῶμεν</span> <i>we are winning a most glorious victory</i> Ro 8:37.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500842"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500842">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the referent could be either God or Christ, but in v. 39 it is God’s love that is mentioned.</p></p>
<p id="n4500843"><a href="file1099.xhtml#n4500843">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 138 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀρχή</span> 6 takes this term as a reference to angelic or transcendent powers (as opposed to merely human rulers). To clarify this, the adjective “heavenly” has been supplied in the translation. Some interpreters see this as a reference to fallen angels or demonic powers, and this view is reflected in some recent translations (NIV, NLT).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
