<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 9</h2>
<p id="n660091"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n660091">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660092"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n660092">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from heaven” (the same Greek word means both “heaven” and “sky”).</p></p>
<p id="n660093"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n660093">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 2 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄβυσσος</span> 2 states, “<i>netherworld</i>, <i>abyss,</i> esp. the abode of the dead Ro 10:7 (Ps 106:26) and of demons Lk 8:31; dungeon where the devil is kept Rv 20:3; abode of the <span class="greek">θηρίον</span>, the Antichrist 11:7; 17:8; of <span class="greek">᾿Αβαδδών</span> (q.v.), the angel of the underworld 9:11…<span class="greek">φρέαρ τῆς ἀ</span>. 9:1f; capable of being sealed 9:1; 20:1, 3.”</p></p>
<p id="n660094"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n660094">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n660095"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n660095">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the shaft,” but since this would be somewhat redundant in English, the pronoun “it” is used here.</p></p>
<p id="n660096"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n660096">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n660097"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n660097">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660098"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n660098">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 352 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐξουσία</span> 2, “potential or resource to command, control, or govern, <i>capability, might, power</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n660099"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n660099">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600910"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The dative indirect object (<span class="greek">αὐταῖς</span>, <span class="translit">autais</span>) was converted into the subject (“they”) as this more closely approximates English usage. The following <span class="greek">ἵ῞να</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) is taken as substantival, introducing a direct object clause. In this case, because it is reported speech, the <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> is similar to the declarative <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6600911"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600911">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men”; but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used in a generic sense here of both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n6600912"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600912">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The article <span class="greek">τῶν</span> (<span class="translit">tōn</span>) has been translated as a possessive pronoun here (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n6600913"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600913">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It was not permitted to them”; the referent (the locusts) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6600914"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600914">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “permission” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n6600915"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600915">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The two <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clauses of 9:5 are understood to be functioning as epexegetical or complementary clauses related to <span class="greek">ἐδόθη</span> (<span class="translit">edothē</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6600916"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600916">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 168 s.v. <span class="greek">βασανισμός</span> states, “1. infliction of severe suffering or pain associated with torture or torment, <i>tormenting, torture</i> Rv 9:5b.—2. the severe pain experienced through torture, <i>torment</i> vs. 5a; 14:11; 18:10, 15; (w. <span class="greek">πένθος</span>) vs. 7.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600917"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The pronoun “them” is not in the Greek text but is picked up from the previous clause. </p></p>
<p id="n6600918"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600918">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “like the torture,” but this is redundant in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n6600919"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a man”; but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used here in an individualized sense without being limited to the male gender.</p></p>
<p id="n6600920"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600920">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600921"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600921">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men”; but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used in a generic sense here of both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n6600922"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600922">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6600923"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600923">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “not be able to” was used in the translation to emphasize the strong negation (<span class="greek">οὐ μή</span>, <span class="translit">ou mē</span>) in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n6600924"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600924">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the introduction of the description of the locusts, which is somewhat parenthetical in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6600925"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600925">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600926"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600926">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation attempts to bring out the double uncertainty in this clause in the Greek text, involving both the form (<span class="greek">ὡς στέφανοι</span>, <span class="translit">hōs stephanoi</span>, “like crowns”) and the material (<span class="greek">ὅμοιοι χρυσῷ</span>, <span class="translit">homoioi chrusō</span>, “similar to gold”).</p></p>
<p id="n6600927"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600927">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “human faces.” The Greek term <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is often used in a generic sense, referring to both men and women. However, because “women’s hair” in the next clause suggests a possible gender distinction here, “men’s” was retained.</p></p>
<p id="n6600928"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600928">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600929"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600929">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “scales like iron breastplates” (RSV, NRSV) although the Greek term <span class="greek">θώραξ</span> (<span class="translit">thōrax</span>) would have to shift its meaning within the clause, and elsewhere in biblical usage (e.g., Eph 6:14; 1 Thess 5:8) it normally means “breastplate.” See also L&amp;N 8.38.</p></p>
<p id="n6600930"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600930">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> In the Greek text there is a shift to the present tense here; the previous verbs translated “had” are imperfects.</p></p>
<p id="n6600931"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600931">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 352 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐξουσία</span> 2, “potential or resource to command, control, or govern, <i>capability, might, power</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600932"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600932">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> Both the Hebrew <i>Abaddon</i> and the Greek <i>Apollyon</i> mean “Destroyer.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600933"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600933">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold.” Here <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6600934"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600934">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600935"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600935">35</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several key <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>47</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> A 0207 1611 2053 2344 lat sy<sup>h</sup> co) lack the word <span class="greek">τεσσάρων</span> (<span class="translit">tessarōn</span>, “four”) before <span class="greek">κεράτων</span> (<span class="translit">keratōn</span>, “horns”). The word seems to have been added by scribes because a “horned” altar (described in the OT [Exod 30:2, 10]) could have only four “horns” or projections at the corners. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n6600936"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600936">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600937"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600937">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">λῦσον</span> (<span class="translit">luson</span>) BDAG 606-7 s.v. <span class="greek">λύω</span> 2 states, “<i>set free, loose, untie</i>—a. lit. a pers., animal, or thing that is bound or tied…Angels that are bound Rv 9:14f.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600938"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600938">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600939"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600939">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek article <span class="greek">τήν</span> (<span class="translit">tēn</span>) has been translated with demonstrative force here. </p></p>
<p id="n6600940"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600940">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here and before the following term “month” since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n6600941"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600941">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that they might kill,” but the English infinitive is an equivalent construction to indicate purpose here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600942"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600942">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600943"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600943">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “twenty thousand of ten thousands.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600944"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600944">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the introduction of the description of the horses and riders, which is somewhat parenthetical in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6600945"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600945">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and those seated on them.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600946"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600946">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the vision”; the Greek article has been translated as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n6600947"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600947">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 79.33 states, “‘fiery red’…. One may also render ‘fiery red’ as ‘red like fire’ or ‘the color of fire.’”</p></p>
<p id="n6600948"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600948">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 1022 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑακίνθινος</span> states, “<i>hyacinth-colored,</i> i.e., dark blue (dark red?) w. <span class="greek">πύρινος</span> Rv 9:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600949"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600949">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 446 s.v. <span class="greek">θειώδης</span> states, “<i>sulphurous</i> Rv 9:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600950"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600950">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> The colors of the riders’ <i>breastplates</i> parallel the three plagues of fire, smoke, and sulfur in v. 18.</p></p>
<p id="n6600951"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600951">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600952"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600952">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “brimstone.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600953"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600953">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase <span class="greek">ἐκ τοῦ πυρὸς καὶ τοῦ καπνοῦ καὶ τοῦ θείου τοῦ ἐκπορευομένου ἐκ τῶν στομάτων αὐτῶν</span> (“by the fire, the smoke, and the sulfur that came out of their mouths”) is taken as epexegetical (explanatory) to the phrase <span class="greek">τῶν τριῶν πληγῶν τούτων</span> (“these three plagues”).</p></p>
<p id="n6600954"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600954">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 352 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐξουσία</span> 2, “potential or resource to command, control, or govern, <i>capability, might, power</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600955"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600955">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600956"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600956">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “made” is not in the Greek text but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n6600957"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600957">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here or before the following materials in this list, since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n6600958"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600958">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation, with “furthermore” used to indicate a continuation of the preceding.</p></p>
<p id="n6600959"><a href="file1242.xhtml#n6600959">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">φαρμακεία</span> (<span class="translit">pharmakeia</span>, “magic spells”) see L&amp;N 53.100: “the use of magic, often involving drugs and the casting of spells upon people—‘to practice magic, to cast spells upon, to engage in sorcery, magic, sorcery.’ <span class="greek">φαρμακεία</span>: <span class="greek">ἐν τῇ φαρμακείᾳ σου ἐπλανήθησαν πάντα τὰ ἔθνη</span> ‘with your magic spells you deceived all the peoples (of the world)’ Re 18:23.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
