<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Mark 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Destruction of the Temple </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> Now<sup><a id="n410131" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n410131">1</a></sup> as Jesus<sup><a id="n410132" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n410132">2</a></sup> was going out of the temple courts, one of his disciples said to him, “Teacher, look at these tremendous stones and buildings!”<sup><a id="n410133" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n410133">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:2</span> Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great buildings? Not one stone will be left on another.<sup><a id="n410134" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n410134">4</a></sup> All will be torn down!”<sup><a id="n410135" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n410135">5</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Signs of the End of the Age </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:3</span> So<sup><a id="n410136" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n410136">6</a></sup> while he was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John,<sup><a id="n410137" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n410137">7</a></sup> and Andrew asked him privately, <span class="verse">13:4</span> “Tell us, when will these things<sup><a id="n410138" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n410138">8</a></sup> happen? And what will be the sign that all these things are about to take place?” <span class="verse">13:5</span> Jesus began to say to them, “Watch out<sup><a id="n410139" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n410139">9</a></sup> that no one misleads you. <span class="verse">13:6</span> Many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’<sup><a id="n4101310" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101310">10</a></sup> and they will mislead many. <span class="verse">13:7</span> When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed. These things must happen, but the end is still to come.<sup><a id="n4101311" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101311">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:8</span> For nation will rise up in arms<sup><a id="n4101312" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101312">12</a></sup> against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places, and there will be famines.<sup><a id="n4101313" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101313">13</a></sup> These are but the beginning of birth pains. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Persecution of Disciples</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:9</span> “You must watch out for yourselves. You will be handed over<sup><a id="n4101314" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101314">14</a></sup> to councils<sup><a id="n4101315" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101315">15</a></sup> and beaten in the synagogues.<sup><a id="n4101316" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101316">16</a></sup> You will stand before governors and kings<sup><a id="n4101317" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101317">17</a></sup> because of me, as a witness to them. <span class="verse">13:10</span> First the gospel must be preached to all nations. <span class="verse">13:11</span> When they arrest you and hand you over for trial,<sup><a id="n4101318" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101318">18</a></sup> do not worry about what to speak. But say whatever is given you at that time,<sup><a id="n4101319" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101319">19</a></sup> for it is not you speaking, but the Holy Spirit. <span class="verse">13:12</span> Brother will hand over brother to death, and a father his child. Children will rise against<sup><a id="n4101320" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101320">20</a></sup> parents and have them put to death. <span class="verse">13:13</span> You will be hated by everyone because of my name.<sup><a id="n4101321" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101321">21</a></sup> But the one who endures to the end will be saved.<sup><a id="n4101322" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101322">22</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Abomination of Desolation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:14</span> “But when you see <i>the abomination of desolation</i><sup><a id="n4101323" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101323">23</a></sup> standing where it<sup><a id="n4101324" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101324">24</a></sup> should not be” (let the reader understand),<sup><a id="n4101325" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101325">25</a></sup> “then those in Judea must flee<sup><a id="n4101326" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101326">26</a></sup> to the mountains. <span class="verse">13:15</span> The one on the roof<sup><a id="n4101327" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101327">27</a></sup> must not come down or go inside to take anything out of his house.<sup><a id="n4101328" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101328">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:16</span> The one in the field must not turn back to get his cloak. <span class="verse">13:17</span> Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who are nursing their babies in those days! <span class="verse">13:18</span> Pray that it may not be in winter. <span class="verse">13:19</span> For in those days there will be suffering<sup><a id="n4101329" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101329">29</a></sup> unlike anything that has happened<sup><a id="n4101330" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101330">30</a></sup> from the beginning of the creation that God created until now, or ever will happen. <span class="verse">13:20</span> And if the Lord had not cut short those days, no one would be saved. But because of the elect, whom he chose, he has cut them<sup><a id="n4101331" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101331">31</a></sup> short. <span class="verse">13:21</span> Then<sup><a id="n4101332" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101332">32</a></sup> if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’<sup><a id="n4101333" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101333">33</a></sup> or ‘Look, there he is!’ do not believe him. <span class="verse">13:22</span> For false messiahs<sup><a id="n4101334" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101334">34</a></sup> and false prophets will appear and perform signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, the elect. <span class="verse">13:23</span> Be careful! I have told you everything ahead of time. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Arrival of the Son of Man </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:24</span> “But in those days, after that suffering,<sup><a id="n4101335" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101335">35</a></sup> <i>the sun will be darkened and the moon will not give its light;</i> <span class="verse">13:25</span> <i>the stars will be falling from heaven</i>, <i>and</i> <i>the powers in the heavens will be shaken</i>.<sup><a id="n4101338" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101338">38</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:26</span> Then everyone<sup><a id="n4101339" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101339">39</a></sup> will see <i>the Son of Man arriving in the clouds</i><sup><a id="n4101340" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101340">40</a></sup> with great power and glory. <span class="verse">13:27</span> Then he will send angels and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of heaven.<sup><a id="n4101341" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101341">41</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Fig Tree </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:28</span> “Learn this parable from the fig tree: Whenever its branch becomes tender and puts out its leaves, you know that summer is near. <span class="verse">13:29</span> So also you, when you see these things happening, know<sup><a id="n4101342" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101342">42</a></sup> that he is near, right at the door. <span class="verse">13:30</span> I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4101343" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101343">43</a></sup> this generation<sup><a id="n4101344" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101344">44</a></sup> will not pass away until all these things take place. <span class="verse">13:31</span> Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.<sup><a id="n4101345" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101345">45</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Be Ready!</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:32</span> “But as for that day or hour no one knows it—neither the angels in heaven, nor the Son<sup><a id="n4101346" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101346">46</a></sup> —except the Father. <span class="verse">13:33</span> Watch out! Stay alert!<sup><a id="n4101347" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101347">47</a></sup> For you do not know when the time will come. <span class="verse">13:34</span> It is like a man going on a journey. He left his house and put his slaves<sup><a id="n4101348" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101348">48</a></sup> in charge, assigning<sup><a id="n4101349" href="file1011_notes.xhtml#n4101349">49</a></sup> to each his work, and commanded the doorkeeper to stay alert. <span class="verse">13:35</span> Stay alert, then, because you do not know when the owner of the house will return—whether during evening, at midnight, when the rooster crows, or at dawn— <span class="verse">13:36</span> or else he might find you asleep when he returns suddenly. <span class="verse">13:37</span> What I say to you I say to everyone: Stay alert!” </p>

</body>
</html>