<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Philippians 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Philippians<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">True and False Righteousness</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Finally, my brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n500031" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n500031">1</a></sup> rejoice in the Lord! To write this again is no trouble to me, and it is a safeguard for you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:2</span> Beware of the dogs,<sup><a id="n500032" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n500032">2</a></sup> beware of the evil workers, beware of those who mutilate the flesh!<sup><a id="n500033" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n500033">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:3</span> For we are the circumcision,<sup><a id="n500034" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n500034">4</a></sup> the ones who worship by the Spirit of God,<sup><a id="n500035" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n500035">5</a></sup> exult in Christ Jesus, and do not rely on human credentials<sup><a id="n500036" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n500036">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:4</span> —though mine too are significant.<sup><a id="n500037" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n500037">7</a></sup> If someone thinks he has good reasons to put confidence in human credentials,<sup><a id="n500038" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n500038">8</a></sup> I have more: <span class="verse">3:5</span> I was circumcised on the eighth day, from the people of Israel and the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews. I lived according to the law as a Pharisee.<sup><a id="n500039" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n500039">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:6</span> In my zeal for God I persecuted the church. According to the righteousness stipulated in the law I was blameless. <span class="verse">3:7</span> But these assets I have come to regard as liabilities because of Christ. <span class="verse">3:8</span> More than that, I now regard all things as liabilities compared to the far greater value of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things —indeed, I regard them as dung!<sup><a id="n5000310" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000310">10</a></sup> —that I may gain Christ, <span class="verse">3:9</span> and be found in him, not because I have my own righteousness derived from the law, but because I have the righteousness that comes by way of Christ’s faithfulness<sup><a id="n5000311" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000311">11</a></sup> —a righteousness from God that is in fact<sup><a id="n5000312" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000312">12</a></sup> based on Christ’s<sup><a id="n5000313" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000313">13</a></sup> faithfulness.<sup><a id="n5000314" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000314">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:10</span> My aim is to know him,<sup><a id="n5000315" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000315">15</a></sup> to experience the power of his resurrection, to share in his sufferings,<sup><a id="n5000316" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000316">16</a></sup> and to be like him in his death, <span class="verse">3:11</span> and so, somehow,<sup><a id="n5000317" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000317">17</a></sup> to attain to the resurrection from the dead. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Keep Going Forward</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:12</span> Not that I have already attained this—that is, I have not already been perfected—but I strive to lay hold of that for which Christ Jesus also laid hold of me.<sup><a id="n5000318" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000318">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:13</span> Brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5000319" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000319">19</a></sup> I do not consider myself to have attained this. Instead I am single-minded:<sup><a id="n5000320" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000320">20</a></sup> Forgetting the things that are behind and reaching out for the things that are ahead, <span class="verse">3:14</span> with this goal in mind,<sup><a id="n5000321" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000321">21</a></sup> I strive toward the prize of the upward call of God<sup><a id="n5000322" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000322">22</a></sup> in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">3:15</span> Therefore let those of us who are “perfect” embrace this point of view.<sup><a id="n5000324" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000324">24</a></sup> If you think otherwise, God will reveal to you the error of your ways.<sup><a id="n5000325" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000325">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:16</span> Nevertheless, let us live up to the standard<sup><a id="n5000326" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000326">26</a></sup> that we have already attained.<sup><a id="n5000327" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000327">27</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:17</span> Be imitators of me,<sup><a id="n5000328" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000328">28</a></sup> brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5000329" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000329">29</a></sup> and watch carefully those who are living this way, just as you have us as an example. <span class="verse">3:18</span> For many live, about whom I have often told you, and now, with tears, I tell you that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ. <span class="verse">3:19</span> Their end is destruction, their god is the belly, they exult in their shame, and they think about earthly things.<sup><a id="n5000330" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000330">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:20</span> But our citizenship is in heaven—and we also eagerly await a savior from there, the Lord Jesus Christ, <span class="verse">3:21</span> who will transform these humble bodies of ours<sup><a id="n5000331" href="file1156_notes.xhtml#n5000331">31</a></sup> into the likeness of his glorious body by means of that power by which he is able to subject all things to himself. </p>

</body>
</html>