<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Mark 10</h2>
<p id="n410101"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n410101">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410102"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n410102">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n410103"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n410103">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> Alexandrian and other witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C* L <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0274 892 co) read <span class="greek">καὶ πέραν</span> (<span class="translit">kai peran</span>, “and beyond”), while Western and Caesarean witnesses (C<sup>2</sup> D W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 28 565 579 1241 <i>al</i>) read <span class="greek">πέραν</span> (simply “beyond”). It is difficult to decide between the Alexandrian and Western readings here, but since the parallel in Matt 19:1 omits <span class="greek">καί</span> the weight is slightly in favor of including it here; scribes may have omitted the word here to harmonize this passage to the Matthean passage. Because of the perceived geographical difficulties found in the earlier readings (omission of the word “and” would make it seem as though Judea is beyond the Jordan), the majority of the witnesses (A <span class="apparatus">M</span>) read <span class="greek">διὰ τοῦ πέραν</span> (<span class="translit">dia tou peran</span>, “through the other side”), perhaps trying to indicate the direction of Jesus’ travel.</p></p>
<p id="n410104"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n410104">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> “River” is not in the Greek text but is supplied for clarity. The region referred to here is sometimes known as Transjordan (i.e., “across the Jordan”).</p></p>
<p id="n410105"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n410105">5</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Western text (D it) and a few others have only <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) here, rather than <span class="greek">καὶ προσελθόντες Φαρισαῖοι</span> (<span class="translit">kai proselthontes Pharisaioi</span>, here translated as “then some Pharisees came”). The longer reading, a specific identification of the subject, may have been prompted by the parallel in Matt 19:3. The fact that the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> vary in how they express this subject lends credence to this judgment: <span class="greek">οἱ δὲ Φαρισαῖοι</span> <span class="greek">προσελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">hoi de Pharisaioi proselthontes</span>, “now the Pharisees came”) in W <span class="greek">Θ</span> 565 2542; <span class="greek">καὶ προσελθόντες οἱ Φαρισαῖοι</span> (<span class="translit">kai proselthontes hoi Pharisaioi</span>, “then the Pharisees came”) in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C N (ƒ<sup>1</sup>: <span class="greek">καὶ προσελθόντες ἐπηρώτησαν αὐτὸν οἱ Φαρισαῖοι</span>) 579 1241 1424 <i>pm</i>; and <span class="greek">καὶ προσελθόντες Φαρισαῖοι</span> in A B K L <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 28 700 892 <i>pm</i>. Further, the use of an indefinite plural (a general “they”) is a Markan feature, occurring over twenty times. Thus, internally the evidence looks rather strong for the shorter reading, in spite of the minimal external support for it. However, if scribes assimilated this text to Matt 19:3, a more exact parallel might have been expected: Matthew has <span class="greek">καὶ προσῆλθον αὐτῷ Φαρισαῖοι</span> (<span class="translit">kai prosēlthon autō Pharisaioi</span>, “then Pharisees came to him”). Although the verb form needs to be different according to syntactical requirements of the respective sentences, the word order variety, as well as the presence or absence of the article and the alternation between <span class="greek">δέ</span> and <span class="greek">καί</span> as the introductory conjunction, all suggest that the variety of readings might not be due to scribal adjustments toward Matthew. At the same time, the article with <span class="greek">Φαρισαῖοι</span> is found in both Gospels in many of the same witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span> in Matt; <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> <i>pm</i> in Mark), and the anarthrous <span class="greek">Φαρισαῖοι</span> is likewise parallel in many <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B L ƒ<sup>13</sup> 700 892). Another consideration is the possibility that very early in the transmissional history, scribes naturally inserted the most obvious subject (the Pharisees would be the obvious candidates as the ones to test Jesus). This may account for the reading with <span class="greek">δέ</span>, since Mark nowhere else uses this conjunction to introduce the Pharisees into the narrative. As solid as the internal arguments against the longer reading seem to be, the greatest weakness is the witnesses that support it. The Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> are prone to alter the text by adding, deleting, substituting, or rearranging large amounts of material. There are times when the rationale for this seems inexplicable. In light of the much stronger evidence for “the Pharisees came,” even though it occurs in various permutations, it is probably wisest to retain the words. This judgment, however, is hardly certain.</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 2:16.</p></p>
<p id="n410106"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n410106">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> In Greek this phrase occurs at the end of the sentence. It has been brought forward to conform to English style.</p></p>
<p id="n410107"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n410107">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The personal pronoun “his” is not in the Greek text, but is certainly implied and has been supplied in the English translation to clarify the sense of the statement (cf. “his wife” in 10:7). </p></p>
<p id="n410108"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n410108">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The particle <span class="greek">εἰ</span> (<span class="translit">ei</span>) is often used to introduce both indirect and direct questions. Thus, another possible translation is to take this as an indirect question: “They asked him if it were lawful for a man to divorce his wife.” See BDF §440.3.</p><p><b>sn</b> The question of the Pharisees was anything but sincere; they were asking it <i>to test him</i>. Jesus was now in the jurisdiction of Herod Antipas (i.e., Judea and beyond the Jordan) and it is likely that the Pharisees were hoping he might answer the question of divorce in a way similar to John the Baptist and so suffer the same fate as John, i.e., death at the hands of Herod (cf. 6:17-19). Jesus answered the question not on the basis of rabbinic custom and the debate over Deut 24:1, but rather from the account of creation and God’s original design.</p></p>
<p id="n410109"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n410109">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But answering, he said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101010"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101010">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to divorce.” The pronoun has been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Deut 24:1. The Pharisees were all in agreement that the OT <i>permitted a man to write a certificate of dismissal and divorce</i> his wife (not vice-versa) and that remarriage was therefore sanctioned. But the two rabbinic schools of Shammai and Hillel differed on the grounds for divorce. Shammai was much stricter than Hillel and permitted divorce only in the case of sexual immorality. Hillel permitted divorce for almost any reason (cf. the Mishnah, <i>m. Gittin</i> 9.10).</p></p>
<p id="n4101011"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101011">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “heart” (a collective singular).</p></p>
<p id="n4101012"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101012">12</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span> (<span class="translit">ho theos</span>, “God”) as the explicit subject of <span class="greek">ἐποίησεν</span> (<span class="translit">epoiēsen</span>, “he made”; A D W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy), while the most significant witnesses, along with a few others, lack <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C L <span class="greek">Δ</span> 579 co). On the one hand, it is possible that the shorter reading is an assimilation to the wording of the LXX of Gen 1:27b where <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span> is lacking. However, since it is mentioned at the beginning of the verse (Gen 1:27a) with <span class="greek">ἐποίησεν</span> scribes may have been motivated to add it in Mark to make the subject clear. Further, confusion could easily arise in this dominical saying, because Moses was the previously mentioned subject (v. 5) and inattentive readers might regard him as the subject of <span class="greek">ἐποίησεν</span> in v. 6. Thus, both on internal and external grounds, the most probable wording of the <i>Ausgangstext</i> here lacked <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4101013"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101013">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 1:27; 5:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4101014"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101014">14</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The earliest witnesses, as well as a few other significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 892* sy<sup>s</sup>), lack the rest of the quotation from Gen 2:24, “and will be united with his wife.” Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> ([A C] D [L N] W [<span class="greek">Δ</span>] <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>[1],13</sup> [579] <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat co) have the clause. It could be argued that the shorter reading was an accidental omission, due to this clause and v. 8 both beginning with <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”). But if that were the case, one might expect to see corrections in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> or B. This can be overstated, of course; both <span class="smcaps">mss</span> combine in their errors on several other occasions. However, the nature of the omission here (both its length and the fact that it is from the OT) argues that <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> and B reflect the autographic wording. Further, the form of the longer reading is identical with the LXX of Gen 2:24, but different from the quotation in Matt 19:5 (<span class="greek">προσκολληθήσεται</span> vs. <span class="greek">κολληθήσεται</span> [<span class="translit">proskollēthēsetai</span> vs. <span class="translit">kollēthēsetai</span>], <span class="greek">πρὸς τὴν γυναῖκα</span> vs. <span class="greek">τῇ γυναικί</span> [<span class="translit">pros tēn gunaika</span> vs. <span class="translit">tē gunaiki</span>]). The significance of this is that Matthew’s quotations of the OT are often, if not usually, directly from the Hebrew—except when he is following Mark’s quotation of the OT. Matthew in fact only departs from Mark’s verbatim quotation of the LXX in 15:4 and 19:19, both texts quoting from Exod 20:12/Deut 5:6 (and in both places the only difference from Mark/LXX is the dropping of <span class="greek">σου</span> [<span class="translit">sou</span>, “your”]). This might suggest that the longer reading here was not part of what the first evangelist had in his copy of Mark. Further, the reading without this line is harder, for the wife is not explicitly mentioned in v. 7; the casual reader could read “the two” of v. 8 as referring to father and mother rather than husband and wife. (And Mark is known for having harder, shorter readings that scribes tried to soften by explanatory expansion: In this chapter alone, cf. the textual problems in v. 6 [the insertion of <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span>]; in v. 13 [the replacement of <span class="greek">αὐτοῖς</span> with <span class="greek">τοῖς προσφέρουσιν</span> or <span class="greek">τοῖς φέρουσιν</span>]; in v. 24 [insertion of <span class="greek">ἐστιν τοὺς πεποιθότας ἐπὶ χρήμασιν</span>, <span class="greek">πλούσιον</span>, or <span class="greek">τὰ χρήματα ἔχοντες</span>; and perhaps in v. 2 [possible insertion of <span class="greek">προσελθόντες Φαρισαῖοι</span> or similar permutations].) Although a decision is difficult, the preferred reading lacks “and will be united with his wife.” NA<sup>28</sup> has the longer reading in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101015"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101015">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 2:24. The “two” refers to husband and wife, not father and mother mentioned in the previous verse. See the <b>tc</b> note on “mother” in v. 7 for discussion.</p></p>
<p id="n4101016"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101016">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “So” to indicate that Jesus’ statement is in response to the disciples’ question (v. 10). </p></p>
<p id="n4101017"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101017">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> It was not uncommon in Jesus’ day for a Jewish man to divorce his wife, but it was extremely rare for a wife to initiate such an action against her husband, since among many things it would have probably left her destitute and without financial support. Mark’s inclusion of the statement <i>And if she divorces her husband and marries another, she commits adultery</i> (v. 12) reflects more the problem of the predominantly Gentile church in Rome to which he was writing. As such it may be an interpretive and parenthetical comment by the author rather than part of the saying by Jesus, which would stop at the end of v. 11. As such it should then be placed in parentheses. Further NT passages that deal with the issue of divorce and remarriage are Matt 5:31-32; 19:1-12; Luke 16:18; 1 Cor 7.</p></p>
<p id="n4101018"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101018">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4101019"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101019">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that he would touch them.” Here the touch is connected with (or conveys) a blessing (cf. v. 16; also BDAG 126 s.v. <span class="greek">ἅπτω</span> 2.c).</p></p>
<p id="n4101020"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101020">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> “Those who brought them” (<span class="greek">ἐπετιμῶν τοῖς προσφέρουσιν</span>, <span class="translit">epetimōn tois prospherousin</span>) is the reading of most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A D W [<span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup>] <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy), but it is probably a motivated reading. Since the subject is not explicit in the earliest and best witnesses as well as several others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C L <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 579 892), scribes would be prone to add “those who brought them” here to clarify that the children were not the ones being scolded. Both on external and internal grounds, the shorter reading is strongly preferred. Similar motivations are behind the translation here, namely, “those who brought them” has been supplied to ensure that the parents who brought the children are in view, not the children themselves.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the disciples scolded them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101021"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101021">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4101022"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101022">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The kingdom of God belongs to such as these</i>. Children are a picture of those whose simple trust illustrates what faith is all about. The remark illustrates how everyone is important to God, even those whom others regard as insignificant.</p></p>
<p id="n4101023"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101023">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101024"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101024">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>receive</i> see John 1:12.</p></p>
<p id="n4101025"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101025">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of the comparison <i>receive the kingdom of God like a child</i> has more to do with a child’s trusting spirit and willingness to be dependent and receive from others than any inherent humility the child might possess.</p></p>
<p id="n4101026"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101026">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The negation in Greek (<span class="greek">οὐ μή</span>, <span class="translit">ou mē</span>) is very strong here.</p></p>
<p id="n4101027"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101027">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4101028"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101028">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Mark 10:17-31</i>. The following unit, Mark 10:17-31, can be divided up into three related sections: (1) the rich man’s question (vv. 17-22); (2) Jesus’ teaching on riches and the kingdom of God (vv. 23-27); and (3) Peter’s statement and Jesus’ answer (vv. 28-31). They are all tied together around the larger theme of the relationship of wealth to the kingdom Jesus had been preaching. The point is that it is impossible to attain to the kingdom by means of riches. The passage as a whole is found in the section 8:27-10:52 in which Mark has been focusing on Jesus’ suffering and true discipleship. In vv. 28-31 Jesus does not deny great rewards to those who follow him, both in the present age and in the age to come, but it must be thoroughly understood that suffering will be integral to the mission of the disciples and the church, for in the very next section (10:32-34) Jesus reaffirmed the truth about his coming rejection, suffering, death, and resurrection. </p></p>
<p id="n4101029"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101029">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> The rich man wanted to know what he must <i>do to inherit eternal life</i>, but Jesus had just finished teaching that eternal life was not earned but simply received (10:15).</p></p>
<p id="n4101030"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101030">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ response, <i>Why do you call me good?</i>, was designed to cause the young man to stop and think for a moment about who Jesus really was. The following statement <i>No one is good except God alone</i> seems to point the man in the direction of Jesus’ essential nature and the demands which logically follow on the man for having said it.</p></p>
<p id="n4101031"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101031">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 20:12-16; Deut 5:16-20, except for <i>do not defraud</i>, which is an allusion to Deut 24:14.</p></p>
<p id="n4101032"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101032">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (the man who asked the question in v. 17) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101033"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101033">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “kept.” The implication of this verb is that the man has obeyed the commandments without fail throughout his life, so the adverb “wholeheartedly” has been added to the translation to bring out this nuance.</p></p>
<p id="n4101034"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101034">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these things.” The referent of the pronoun (the laws mentioned by Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> While the rich man was probably being sincere when he insisted <i>I have wholeheartedly obeyed all these laws</i>, he had confined his righteousness to external obedience. The rich man’s response to Jesus’ command to give away all he had revealed that internally he loved money more than God. </p></p>
<p id="n4101035"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101035">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Since my youth</i>. Judaism regarded the age of thirteen as the age when a man would have become responsible to live by God’s commands.</p></p>
<p id="n4101036"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101036">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the money” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4101037"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101037">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> The call for sacrifice comes with a promise of eternal reward: <i>You will have treasure in heaven</i>. Jesus’ call is a test to see how responsive the man is to God’s direction through him. Will he walk the path God’s agent calls him to walk? For a rich person who got it right, see Zacchaeus in Luke 19:1-10.</p></p>
<p id="n4101038"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101038">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the man who asked the question in v. 17) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101039"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101039">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he had many possessions.” This term (<span class="greek">κτῆμα</span>, <span class="translit">ktēma</span>) is often used for land as a possession.</p></p>
<p id="n4101040"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101040">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101041"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101041">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4101042"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101042">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But answering, Jesus again said to them.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> (<span class="translit">apokritheis</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4101043"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101043">43</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A C D <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 28 565 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy) have here “for those who trust in riches” (<span class="greek">τοὺς πεποιθότας ἐπὶ</span> [<span class="greek">τοῖς</span>] <span class="greek">χρήμασιν</span>, <span class="translit">tous pepoithotas epi</span> [<span class="translit">tois</span>] <span class="translit">chrēmasin</span>); W has <span class="greek">πλούσιον</span> (<span class="translit">plousion</span>) later in the verse, producing the same general modification on the dominical saying (“how hard it is <i>for the rich</i> to enter…”). But such qualifications on the Lord’s otherwise harsh and absolute statements are natural scribal expansions, intended to soften the dictum. Further, the earliest and best witnesses, along with a few others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> sa), lack any such qualifications. That W lacks the longer expansion and only has <span class="greek">πλούσιον</span> suggests that its archetype agreed with <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B here; its voice should be heard with theirs. Thus, both on external and internal grounds, the shorter reading is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4101044"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101044">44</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few witnesses (ƒ<sup>13</sup> 28 579) read <span class="greek">κάμιλον</span> (<span class="translit">kamilon</span>, “rope”) for <span class="greek">κάμηλον</span> (<span class="translit">kamēlon</span>, “camel”), either through accidental misreading of the text or intentionally so as to soften Jesus’ words.</p></p>
<p id="n4101045"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101045">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> The referent of <i>the eye of a needle</i> is a sewing needle. (Although the story of a small gate in Jerusalem known as “The Needle’s Eye” has been widely circulated and may go back as far as the middle ages, there is no evidence that such a gate ever existed.) Jesus was speaking rhetorically to point out that apart from God’s intervention, salvation is impossible (v. 27).</p></p>
<p id="n4101046"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101046">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But they were even more astonished, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγονες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) has been translated here as a finite verb to emphasize the sequence of events: The disciples were astonished, then they spoke.</p></p>
<p id="n4101047"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101047">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of thought.</p></p>
<p id="n4101048"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101048">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> The assumption is that the rich are blessed, so if they risk exclusion, who is left to <i>be saved</i>?</p></p>
<p id="n4101049"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101049">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἄνθρωποις</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpois</span>) is used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women (cf. NASB 1995 update, “people”). Because of the contrast here between mere mortals and God (“impossible for <i>men</i>…all things are possible <i>for God</i>”) the phrase “mere humans” has been used in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4101050"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101050">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> Peter wants reassurance that the disciples’ response and sacrifice has been noticed.</p></p>
<p id="n4101051"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101051">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “We have left everything and followed you.” Koine Greek often used paratactic structure when hypotactic was implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4101052"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101052">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101053"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101053">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this time” (<span class="greek">καιρός</span>, <span class="translit">kairos</span>), but for stylistic reasons this has been translated “this age” here.</p></p>
<p id="n4101054"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101054">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with persecutions.” The “all” has been supplied to clarify that the prepositional phrase belongs not just to the “fields.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101055"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101055">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note that Mark (see also Matt 19:29; Luke 10:25; 18:30) portrays <i>eternal life</i> as something one receives <i>in the age to come</i>, unlike John, who emphasizes the possibility of receiving eternal life in the present (John 5:24).</p></p>
<p id="n4101057"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101057">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “chief priests and scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4101058"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101058">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “scourge him” (the term means to beat severely with a whip, L&amp;N 19.9). BDAG 620 s.v. <span class="greek">μαστιγόω</span> 1.a states, “The ‘verberatio’ is denoted in the passion predictions and explicitly as action by non-Israelites Mt 20:19; Mk 10:34; Lk 18:33”; the <i>verberatio</i> was the beating given to those condemned to death in the Roman judicial system. Here the term <span class="greek">μαστιγόω</span> (<span class="translit">mastigoō</span>) has been translated “flog…severely” to distinguish it from the term <span class="greek">φραγελλόω</span> (<span class="translit">phragelloō</span>) used in Matt 27:26; Mark 15:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4101059"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101059">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “yet” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4101060"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101060">60</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially the later ones (A<sup>[</sup>*<sup>]</sup> W <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy), have “on the third day” (<span class="greek">τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ</span>, <span class="translit">tē tritē hēmera</span>) instead of “after three days.” But not only does Mark nowhere else speak of the resurrection as occurring on the third day, the idiom he uses is a harder reading (cf. Mark 8:31; 9:31, though in the latter text the later witnesses also have <span class="greek">τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ</span>). Further, <span class="greek">τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ</span> conforms to the usage that is almost universally used in Matthew and Luke, and is found in the parallels to this text (Matt 20:19; Luke 18:33). Thus, scribes would be doubly motivated to change the wording. The most reliable witnesses, along with several other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C D L <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 579 892 it co), have resisted this temptation. </p></p>
<p id="n4101061"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101061">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101062"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101062">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “baptism I am baptized with.” This same change has been made in v. 39.</p></p>
<p id="n4101063"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101063">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> No more naïve words have ever been spoken as those found here coming from James and John, “<i>We are able</i>.” They said it with such confidence and ease, yet they had little clue as to what they were affirming. In the next sentence Jesus confirms that they will indeed suffer for his name.</p></p>
<p id="n4101064"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101064">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> After the first passion prediction in 8:31 Jesus rebuked Peter as having been used by Satan. After the second passion prediction in 9:31 the disciples were concerned about who would be the greatest in the kingdom. After the third passion prediction in 10:33 James and John asked for positions of honor and rulership in the kingdom, revealing their complete misunderstanding of the nature of the kingdom and exposing their inadequacy as true disciples of Jesus. Jesus replied that such positions were <i>for those for whom it has been prepared</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4101065"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101065">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4101066"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101066">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ten.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101067"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101067">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “this” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4101068"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101068">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) is normally translated “servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v. 1). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. Also, many slaves in the Roman world became slaves through Rome’s subjugation of conquered nations, kidnapping, or by being born into slave households. </p></p>
<p id="n4101069"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101069">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek word for <i>ransom</i> (<span class="greek">λύτρον</span>, <span class="translit">lutron</span>) is found here and in Matt 20:28 and refers to the payment of a price in order to purchase the freedom of a slave. The idea of Jesus as the “ransom” is that he paid the price with his own life by standing in humanity’s place as a substitute, enduring the judgment that was deserved for sin.</p></p>
<p id="n4101071"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101071">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101072"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101072">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to shout and to say.” The infinitive <span class="greek">λέγειν</span> (<span class="translit">legein</span>) is redundant here and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4101073"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101073">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus was more than a Nazarene to this blind person, who saw quite well that Jesus was <i>Son of David</i>. There was a tradition in Judaism that the Son of David (Solomon) had great powers of healing (Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 8.2.5 [8.42-49]).</p></p>
<p id="n4101074"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101074">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Have mercy on me</i> is a request for healing. It is not owed the man. He simply asks for God’s kind grace.</p></p>
<p id="n4101075"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101075">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rebuked.” The crowd’s view was that surely Jesus would not be bothered with someone as unimportant as a blind beggar.</p></p>
<p id="n4101076"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101076">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101077"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101077">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101078"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101078">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, Jesus said to him.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4101079"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101079">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Master”; <i>Grk</i> <span class="greek">ῥαββουνί</span> (<span class="translit">rabbouni</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4101080"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101080">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that I may see [again].” The phrase can be rendered as an imperative of request, “Please, give me sight.” Since the man is not noted as having been blind from birth (as the man in John 9 was) it is likely the request is to receive back the sight he once had.</p></p>
<p id="n4101081"><a href="file1008.xhtml#n4101081">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “received” (see the note on the phrase “let me see again” in v. 51).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
