<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Hebrews 1</h2>
<p id="n580011"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n580011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “spoke formerly.”</p></p>
<p id="n580012"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n580012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “parts.” The idea is that God’s previous revelation came in many parts and was therefore fragmentary or partial (L&amp;N 63.19), in comparison with the final and complete revelation contained in God’s Son. However, some interpret <span class="greek">πολυμερῶς</span> (<span class="translit">polumerōs</span>) in Heb 1:1 to mean “on many different occasions” and would thus translate “many times” (L&amp;N 67.11). This is the option followed by the NIV “at many times and in various ways.” Finally, this word is also understood to refer to the different manners in which something may be done, and would then be translated “in many different ways” (L&amp;N 89.81). In this last case, the two words <span class="greek">πολυμερῶς</span> and <span class="greek">πολυτρόπως</span> (<span class="translit">polutropōs</span>) mutually reinforce one another (“in many and various ways,” NRSV).</p></p>
<p id="n580013"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n580013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> These two phrases are emphasized in Greek by being placed at the beginning of the sentence and by alliteration.</p></p>
<p id="n580014"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n580014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the fathers.”</p></p>
<p id="n580015"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n580015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek puts an emphasis on the quality of God’s final revelation. As such, it is more than an indefinite notion (“a son”) though less than a definite one (“the son”), for this final revelation is not just through <i>any</i> son of God, nor is the emphasis specifically on the person himself. Rather, the focus here is on the <i>nature</i> of the vehicle of God’s revelation: He is no mere spokesman (or prophet) for God, nor is he merely a heavenly messenger (or angel); instead, this final revelation comes through one who is intimately acquainted with the heavenly Father in a way that only a family member could be. There is, however, no exact equivalent in English (“in son” is hardly good English style).</p><p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>in a son</i> is the fulcrum of Heb 1:1-4. It concludes the contrast of God’s old and new revelation and introduces a series of seven descriptions of the Son. These descriptions show why he is the ultimate revelation of God.</p></p>
<p id="n580016"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n580016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ages.” The temporal (ages) came to be used of the spatial (what exists in those time periods). See Heb 11:3 for the same usage.</p></p>
<p id="n580017"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n580017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who being…and sustaining.” Heb 1:1-4 form one skillfully composed sentence in Greek, but it must be broken into shorter segments to correspond to contemporary English usage, which does not allow for sentences of this length and complexity.</p></p>
<p id="n580018"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n580018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the word of his power.”</p></p>
<p id="n580019"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n580019">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 110:1, quoted often in Hebrews.</p></p>
<p id="n5800110"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having become.” This is part of the same sentence that extends from v. 1 through v. 4 in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n5800111"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Most modern English translations attempt to make the comparison somewhat smoother by treating “name” as if it were the subject of the second element: “as the name he has inherited is superior to theirs” (cf. NAB, NIV, NRSV, CEV). However, the Son is the subject of both the first and second elements: “he became so far better”; “he has inherited a name.” The present translation maintains this parallelism even though it results in a somewhat more awkward rendering.</p><p><b>sn</b> This comparison is somewhat awkward to express in English, but it reflects an important element in the argument of Hebrews: the superiority of Jesus Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n5800112"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5800113"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I have begotten you.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 2:7.</p></p>
<p id="n5800114"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And again,” quoting another OT passage.</p></p>
<p id="n5800115"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “he says” are not in the Greek text but are supplied to make a complete English sentence. In the Greek text this is a continuation of the previous sentence, but English does not normally employ such long and complex sentences.</p></p>
<p id="n5800116"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I will be a father to him and he will be a son to me.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from 2 Sam 7:14 (cf. 1 Chr 17:13).</p></p>
<p id="n5800117"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “And again when he brings.” The translation adopted in the text looks forward to Christ’s second coming to earth. Some take “again” to introduce the quotation (as in 1:5) and understand this as Christ’s first coming, but this view does not fit well with Heb 2:7. Others understand it as his exaltation/ascension to heaven, but this takes the phrase “into the world” in an unlikely way.</p></p>
<p id="n5800118"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800118">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation combining themes from Deut 32:43 and Ps 97:7.</p></p>
<p id="n5800119"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800119">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek correlative conjunctions <span class="greek">μέν</span> and <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">men</span> and <span class="translit">de</span>) emphasize the contrastive parallelism of vs. 7 (what God says about the angels) over against vv. 8-9 and vv. 10-12 (what God says about the son).</p></p>
<p id="n5800120"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He who makes.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800121"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “spirits” (so KJV, NKJV). The Greek word <span class="greek">πνεῦμα</span> (<span class="translit">pneuma</span>) can mean either “wind” or “spirit” depending on the context. Since the context here concerns the superiority of the Son to the angels, many interpreters and most modern English translations see the present verse emphasizing the transitory or ephemeral nature of God’s other servants, the angels, and thus underscoring their inferiority to the Son.</p></p>
<p id="n5800122"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800122">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 104:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5800123"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800124"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb “he says” (<span class="greek">λέγει</span>, <span class="translit">legei</span>) is implied from the <span class="greek">λέγει</span> of v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n5800125"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly, “Your throne is God forever and ever.” This translation is quite doubtful, however, since (1) in the context the Son is being contrasted to the angels and is presented as far better than they. The imagery of God being the Son’s throne would seem to be of God being his authority. If so, in what sense could this <i>not</i> be said of the angels? In what sense is the Son thus contrasted with the angels? (2) The <span class="greek">μέν</span>…<span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">men</span>…<span class="translit">de</span>) construction that connects v. 7 with v. 8 clearly lays out this contrast: “On the one hand, he says of the angels…on the other hand, he says of the Son.” Thus, although it is grammatically <i>possible</i> that <span class="greek">θεός</span> (<span class="translit">theos</span>) in v. 8 should be taken as a predicate nominative, the context and the correlative conjunctions are decidedly against it. Hebrews 1:8 is thus a strong affirmation of the deity of Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n5800126"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the righteous scepter,” but used generically.</p></p>
<p id="n5800127"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800127">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>God…has anointed you over your companions</i>. God’s anointing gives the son a superior position and authority over his fellows.</p></p>
<p id="n5800128"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800128">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 45:6-7.</p></p>
<p id="n5800129"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800129">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>You founded the earth</i>…<i>your years will never run out</i>. In its original setting Ps 102:25-27 refers to the work of God in creation, but here in Hebrews 1:10-12 the writer employs it in reference to Christ, the <i>Lord</i>, making a strong argument for the essential deity of the Son.</p></p>
<p id="n5800130"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800130">30</a> <p><b>tc</b> The words “like a garment” (<span class="greek">ὡς ἱμάτιον</span>, <span class="translit">hōs himation</span>) are found in excellent and early <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B D* 1739) though absent in a majority of witnesses (D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0243 0278 33 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy bo). Although it is possible that longer reading was produced by overzealous scribes who wanted to underscore the frailty of creation, it is much more likely that the shorter reading was produced by scribes who wanted to conform the wording to that of Ps 102:26 (101:27 LXX), which here lacks the second “like a garment.” Both external and internal considerations decidedly favor the longer reading, and point to the author of Hebrews as the one underscoring the difference between the Son and creation.</p><p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>like a garment</i> here is not part of the original OT text (see <b>tc</b> note above); for this reason it has been printed in normal type.</p></p>
<p id="n5800131"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800131">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 102:25-27.</p></p>
<p id="n5800132"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800132">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> The parallel phrases <i>to which of the angels</i> in vv. 5 and 13 show the unity of this series of quotations (vv. 5-14) in revealing the superiority of the Son over angels (v. 4).</p></p>
<p id="n5800133"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800133">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 110:1.</p></p>
<p id="n5800134"><a href="file1192.xhtml#n5800134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sent for service for the sake of those.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
