<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Corinthians 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Corinthians<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s Suffering Servants</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Now because we are fellow workers, we also urge you not to receive the grace of God in vain.<sup><a id="n470061" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n470061">1</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:2</span> For he says, “<i><b>I heard you at the acceptable time, and in the day of salvation I helped you</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n470062" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n470062">2</a></sup> Look, now is <b><i>the acceptable time</i></b>; look, now is <b><i>the day of salvation</i></b>! <span class="verse">6:3</span> We do not give anyone<sup><a id="n470063" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n470063">3</a></sup> an occasion for taking an offense in anything,<sup><a id="n470064" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n470064">4</a></sup> so that no fault may be found with our ministry. <span class="verse">6:4</span> But as God’s servants,<sup><a id="n470065" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n470065">5</a></sup> we have commended ourselves in every way,<sup><a id="n470066" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n470066">6</a></sup> with great endurance, in persecutions,<sup><a id="n470067" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n470067">7</a></sup> in difficulties, in distresses, <span class="verse">6:5</span> in beatings, in imprisonments, in riots,<sup><a id="n470068" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n470068">8</a></sup> in troubles,<sup><a id="n470069" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n470069">9</a></sup> in sleepless nights, in hunger, <span class="verse">6:6</span> by purity, by knowledge, by patience, by benevolence, by the Holy Spirit,<sup><a id="n4700610" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700610">10</a></sup> by genuine<sup><a id="n4700611" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700611">11</a></sup> love, <span class="verse">6:7</span> by truthful<sup><a id="n4700612" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700612">12</a></sup> teaching,<sup><a id="n4700613" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700613">13</a></sup> by the power of God, with weapons of righteousness both for the right hand and for the left,<sup><a id="n4700614" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700614">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:8</span> through glory and dishonor, through slander and praise; regarded as impostors,<sup><a id="n4700615" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700615">15</a></sup> and yet true; <span class="verse">6:9</span> as unknown, and yet well-known; as dying and yet—see!—we continue to live; as those who are scourged<sup><a id="n4700616" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700616">16</a></sup> and yet not executed; <span class="verse">6:10</span> as sorrowful, but always rejoicing, as poor, but making many rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing everything. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:11</span> We have spoken freely to you,<sup><a id="n4700617" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700617">17</a></sup> Corinthians; our heart has been opened wide to you. <span class="verse">6:12</span> Our affection for you is not restricted,<sup><a id="n4700618" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700618">18</a></sup> but you are restricted in your affections for us. <span class="verse">6:13</span> Now as a fair exchange—I speak as to my<sup><a id="n4700619" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700619">19</a></sup> children—open wide your hearts to us<sup><a id="n4700620" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700620">20</a></sup> also. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Unequal Partners</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:14</span> Do not become partners<sup><a id="n4700621" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700621">21</a></sup> with those who do not believe, for what partnership is there between righteousness and lawlessness, or what fellowship does light have with darkness? <span class="verse">6:15</span> And what agreement does Christ have with Beliar?<sup><a id="n4700622" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700622">22</a></sup> Or what does a believer share in common with an unbeliever? <span class="verse">6:16</span> And what mutual agreement does the temple of God have with idols? For we are<sup><a id="n4700623" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700623">23</a></sup> the temple of the living God, just as God said, “<b><i>I will live in them</i></b><sup><a id="n4700624" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700624">24</a></sup> <i><b>and</b></i> <i><b>will walk among them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4700625" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700625">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:17</span> Therefore “<i><b>come out from their midst, and be separate</b></i>,” says the Lord, “<i><b>and</b></i> <i><b>touch no unclean thing</b>,</i><sup><a id="n4700626" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700626">26</a></sup> <i>and</i> <i>I will welcome</i><sup><a id="n4700627" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700627">27</a></sup> <i>you</i>,<sup><a id="n4700628" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700628">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:18</span> <i>and</i> <i>I will be a father to you, and you will be my sons and daughters</i>,”<sup><a id="n4700629" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700629">29</a></sup> says the All-Powerful Lord.<sup><a id="n4700630" href="file1131_notes.xhtml#n4700630">30</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>