<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 5</h2>
<p id="n440051"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n440051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n440052"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n440052">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἐνέγκας</span> (<span class="translit">enenkas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n440053"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n440053">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a good example of the Greek verb <i>fill</i> (<span class="greek">πληρόω</span>, <span class="translit">plēroō</span>) meaning “to exercise control over someone’s thought and action” (cf. Eph 5:18).</p></p>
<p id="n440054"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n440054">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “from the sale of” are not in the Greek text, but are supplied to clarify the meaning, since the phrase “proceeds from the land” could possibly be understood as crops rather than money from the sale.</p></p>
<p id="n440055"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n440055">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Remaining to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n440056"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n440056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The negative interrogative particle <span class="greek">οὐχί</span> (<span class="translit">ouchi</span>) expects a positive reply to this question and the following one (“And when it was sold, was it not at your disposal?”).</p></p>
<p id="n440057"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n440057">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it”; the referent of the pronoun (the money generated from the sale of the land) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n440058"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n440058">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “How is it that you have [or Why have you] placed this deed in your heart?” Both of these literal translations differ from the normal way of expressing the thought in English.</p></p>
<p id="n440059"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n440059">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to men.” If Peter’s remark refers only to the apostles, the translation “to men” would be appropriate. But if (as is likely) the action was taken to impress the entire congregation (who would presumably have witnessed the donation or been aware of it) then the more general “to people” is more appropriate, since the audience would have included both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n4400510"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “fear came on,” “fear seized”; <i>Grk</i> “fear happened to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400511"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “arose.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400512"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “wrapped up” for <span class="greek">συνέστειλαν</span> (<span class="translit">sunesteilan</span>) is suggested by L&amp;N 79.119, but another interpretation is possible. The same verb could also be translated “removed” (see L&amp;N 15.200), although that sense appears somewhat redundant and out of sequence with the following verb and participle (“carried him out and buried him”).</p></p>
<p id="n4400513"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400513">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Buried</i>. Same day burial was a custom in the Jewish world of the first century (cf. also Deut 21:23).</p></p>
<p id="n4400514"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened that after an interval of about three hours.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4400515"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “came in, not knowing.” The participle has been translated with concessive or adversative force: “although she did not know.” In English, the adversative conjunction (“but”) conveys this nuance more smoothly.</p></p>
<p id="n4400516"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the two of” are not in the Greek text, but have been supplied to indicate that the verb (<span class="greek">ἀπέδοσθε</span>, <span class="translit">apedosthe</span>) is plural and thus refers to both Ananias and Sapphira.</p></p>
<p id="n4400517"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so much,” “as much as this.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400518"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “She”; the referent (Sapphira) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400519"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And at once.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400520"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And great.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400521"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “fear came on,” “fear seized”; <i>Grk</i> “fear happened to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400522"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400522">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is the first occurrence of the term <i>church</i> (<span class="greek">ἐκκλησία</span>, <span class="translit">ekklēsia</span>) in Acts. It refers to an assembly of people.</p></p>
<p id="n4400523"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The miraculous nature of these signs is implied in the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4400524"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And by.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400525"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “With one mind.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400526"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “colonnade”; <i>Grk</i> “stoa.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Solomon</i>’<i>s Portico</i> was a covered walkway formed by rows of columns supporting a roof and open on the inner side facing the center of the temple complex. Located beside the Court of the Gentiles, it was a very public area.</p></p>
<p id="n4400527"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to associate with them.” The group was beginning to have a controversial separate identity. People were cautious about joining them. The next verse suggests that the phrase “none of the rest” in this verse is rhetorical hyperbole.</p></p>
<p id="n4400528"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the people thought very highly of them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400529"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “More and more believers were added to the Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400530"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a continuation of the preceding sentence in Greek, but because this would produce an awkward sentence in English, a new sentence was begun here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400532"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400532">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Unclean spirits</i> refers to evil spirits.</p></p>
<p id="n4400533"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Literally a relative pronoun, “who.” In English, however, a relative clause (“bringing the sick and those troubled by unclean spirits, who were all being healed”) could be understood to refer only to the second group (meaning only those troubled by unclean spirits were being healed) or even that the unclean spirits were being healed. To avoid this ambiguity the pronoun “they” was used to begin a new English sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n4400534"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400534">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They were all being healed</i>. Note how the healings that the apostles provided were comprehensive in their consistency.</p></p>
<p id="n4400535"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400535">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Sadducees</i> in 4:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4400536"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400536">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4400537"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400537">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Filled with jealousy</i>. In Acts, the term “jealousy” (<span class="greek">ζήλος</span>, <span class="translit">zēlos</span>) occurs only here and in Acts 13:45. It is a key term in Judaism for religiously motivated rage (1 Macc 2:24; 1QH 14:13-15; <i>m. Sanhedrin</i> 9:5). It was a zeal motivated by a desire to maintain the purity of the faith.</p></p>
<p id="n4400538"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “jealousy, and they.” In the Greek text this is a continuation of the previous sentence, but a new sentence has been started here in the translation for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4400539"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400539">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “they arrested.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400540"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400540">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the angel of the Lord.” Linguistically, “angel of the Lord” is the same in both testaments (and thus, he is either “an angel of the Lord” or “the angel of the Lord” in both testaments). For arguments and implications, see <i>ExSyn</i> 252; M. J. Davidson, “Angels,” <i>DJG</i>, 9; W. G. MacDonald argues for “an angel” in both testaments: “Christology and ‘The Angel of the Lord’,” <i>Current Issues in Biblical and Patristic Interpretation</i>, 324-35. </p></p>
<p id="n4400541"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400541">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “opening the doors of the prison.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀνοίξας</span> (<span class="translit">anoixas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to the requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400542"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400542">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Greek <span class="greek">φυλακῆς</span> (<span class="translit">phulakēs</span>), a different word from the one in v. 18 (<span class="greek">τήρησις</span>, <span class="translit">tērēsis</span>, “jail”).</p></p>
<p id="n4400543"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “brought them out.” <i>Grk</i> “and leading them out, said.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐξαγαγών</span> (<span class="translit">exagagōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Led them out</i>. The action by God served to vindicate the apostles. It showed that whatever court the Jewish leaders represented, they did not represent God.</p></p>
<p id="n4400544"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400544">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.” This is actually a reference to the courts surrounding the temple proper, and has been translated accordingly. </p></p>
<p id="n4400545"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400545">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “speak.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400546"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400546">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.” See the note on the same phrase in the preceding verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4400547"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400547">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐδίδασκον</span> (<span class="translit">edidaskon</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4400548"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400548">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the council” (the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n4400549"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400549">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> A hendiadys (two different terms referring to a single thing) is likely here (a reference to a single legislative body rather than two separate ones) because the term <span class="greek">γερουσίαν</span> (<span class="translit">gerousian</span>) is used in both 1 Macc 12:6 and Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 13.5.8 (13.166) to refer to the Sanhedrin.</p></p>
<p id="n4400550"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400550">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sons of Israel.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400551"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400551">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have them”; the referent (the apostles) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400552"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400552">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “before them” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4400553"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400553">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">ὑπηρέτης</span> (<span class="translit">hupēretēs</span>) generally means “servant,” but in the NT is used for many different types of servants, like attendants to a king, the officers of the Sanhedrin (as here), assistants to magistrates, and (especially in the Gospel of John) Jewish guards in the Jerusalem temple (see L&amp;N 35.20).</p></p>
<p id="n4400554"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400554">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “for them” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4400555"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400555">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “reported, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4400556"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400556">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “them” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects in Greek were often omitted when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4400557"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400557">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “captain.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400558"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400558">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the official of the temple,” a title for the commander of the Jewish soldiers guarding the temple (thus the translation, “the commander of the temple guard”). See L&amp;N 37.91.</p></p>
<p id="n4400559"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400559">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “heard these words.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400560"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400560">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “concerning them,” agreeing with the plural antecedent “these words.” Since the phrase “these words” was translated as the singular “this report,” the singular “concerning it” is used here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400561"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400561">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> The optative verb here expresses confused uncertainty.</p></p>
<p id="n4400562"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400562">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.” This is actually a reference to the courts surrounding the temple proper, and has been translated accordingly. </p></p>
<p id="n4400563"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400563">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> Obeying God (see v. 29), the apostles were <i>teaching</i> again (4:18-20; 5:20). They did so despite the risk.</p></p>
<p id="n4400564"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400564">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “captain.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400565"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400565">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the official [of the temple],” a title for the commander of the Jewish soldiers guarding the temple (thus the translation, “the commander of the temple guard”). See L&amp;N 37.91.</p></p>
<p id="n4400566"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400566">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">ὑπηρέτης</span> (<span class="translit">hupēretēs</span>) generally means “servant,” but in the NT is used for many different types of servants. See the note on the word “officers” in v. 22.</p></p>
<p id="n4400567"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400567">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brought them”; the referent (the apostles) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400568"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400568">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “without violence.” It is clear, as well, that the apostles did not resist arrest.</p></p>
<p id="n4400569"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400569">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for they feared lest they be stoned by the people.” The translation uses a less awkward English equivalent. This is an explanatory note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4400570"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400570">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Sanhedrin” (the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n4400571"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400571">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “interrogated,” “asked.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400572"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400572">72</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, including a few significant witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D E [<span class="greek">Ψ</span>] 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy sa), have the negative particle <span class="greek">οὐ</span> (<span class="translit">ou</span>) here, effectively turning the high priest’s words into a question: “Did we not give you strict orders not to teach in this name?” But the earliest and most significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, along with some others (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B 1175 lat bo), lack the particle, making this a strong statement rather than a question. Scribes may have been tempted to omit the particle to strengthen the contrast between official Judaism and the new faith, but the fact that v. 27 introduces the quotation with <span class="greek">ἐπηρώτησεν</span> (<span class="translit">epērōtēsen</span>, “he questioned”) may well have prompted scribes to add <span class="greek">οὐ</span> to convert the rebuke into a question. Further, that excellent witnesses affirm the shorter reading is sufficient ground for accepting it as most probably authentic. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the particle in brackets, indicating some doubt as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400573"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400573">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “We commanded you with a commandment” (a Semitic idiom that is emphatic).</p></p>
<p id="n4400574"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400574">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>name</i> (i.e., person) of Jesus is the constant issue of debate.</p></p>
<p id="n4400575"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400575">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400577"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400577">77</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To bring this man’s blood on us</i> is an idiom meaning “you intend to make us guilty of this man’s death.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400578"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400578">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “apostles answered and said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400579"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400579">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Obey</i>. See 4:19. This response has Jewish roots (Dan 3:16-18; 2 Macc 7:2; Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 17.6.3 [17.159]).</p></p>
<p id="n4400580"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400580">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἀνθρώποις</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpois</span>) has been translated as a generic noun (“people”).</p></p>
<p id="n4400581"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400581">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “ancestors”; <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400582"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400582">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “by crucifying him” (“hang on a tree” is by the time of the first century an idiom for crucifixion). The allusion is to the judgment against Jesus as a rebellious figure, appealing to the language of Deut 21:23. The Jewish leadership has badly “misjudged” Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4400583"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400583">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “This one God exalted” (emphatic).</p></p>
<p id="n4400584"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400584">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Founder” (of a movement).</p></p>
<p id="n4400585"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400585">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to give repentance and forgiveness of sins to Israel.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400586"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400586">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “things.” They are preaching these things even to the hostile leadership.</p></p>
<p id="n4400587"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400587">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Those who obey</i>. The implication, of course, is that the leadership is disobeying God.</p></p>
<p id="n4400588"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400588">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> The only other use of this verb for anger (<i>furious</i>) is Acts 7:54 after Stephen’s speech.</p></p>
<p id="n4400589"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400589">89</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Wanted to execute them</i>. The charge would surely be capital insubordination (Exod 22:28).</p></p>
<p id="n4400590"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400590">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>Pharisee</i> was a member of one of the most important and influential religious and political parties of Judaism in the time of Jesus. There were more Pharisees than Sadducees (according to Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 17.2.4 [17.42] there were more than 6,000 Pharisees at about this time). Pharisees differed with Sadducees on certain doctrines and patterns of behavior. The Pharisees were strict and zealous adherents to the laws of the OT and to numerous additional traditions such as angels and bodily resurrection.</p></p>
<p id="n4400591"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400591">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Gamaliel</i> was a famous Jewish scholar and teacher mentioned here in v. 34 and in Acts 22:3. He had a grandson of the same name and is referred to as “Gamaliel the Elder” to avoid confusion. He is quoted a number of times in the Mishnah, was given the highest possible title for Jewish teachers, <i>Rabba</i> (cf. John 20:16), and was highly regarded in later rabbinic tradition.</p></p>
<p id="n4400592"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400592">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “standing up in the council, ordered.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναστάς</span> (<span class="translit">anastas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400593"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400593">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Sanhedrin” (the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n4400594"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400594">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to them”; the referent (the council) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400595"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400595">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Israelite men,” although this is less natural English. The Greek term here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which only exceptionally is used in a generic sense of both males and females. In this context, it is highly unlikely that this is a generic usage, since Gamaliel was addressing the Sanhedrin, the Jewish high council, which would have been exclusively male. </p></p>
<p id="n4400596"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400596">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “men, be careful.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400597"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400597">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For before these days.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400598"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400598">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” The relative pronoun was replaced by the pronoun “he,” and a new sentence was begun in the translation at this point.</p></p>
<p id="n4400599"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n4400599">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and they came to nothing.” Gamaliel’s argument is that these two insurrectionists were taken care of by natural events.</p></p>
<p id="n44005100"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “registration.”</p></p>
<p id="n44005101"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἀφίστημι</span> (<span class="translit">aphistēmi</span>) as a transitive means “cause to revolt” as used in Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 8.7.5 (8.198), 20.5.2 (20.102); see BDAG 157 s.v. 1.</p></p>
<p id="n44005102"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>) has been translated as a generic noun (“people”).</p></p>
<p id="n44005103"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “it will be put to an end.”</p></p>
<p id="n44005104"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is expressed in a first class condition, in contrast to the condition in v. 38b, which is third class. As such, v. 39 is rhetorically presented as the more likely option.</p></p>
<p id="n44005105"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to L&amp;N 39.32, the verb <span class="greek">εὑρεθῆτε</span> (<span class="translit">heurethēte</span>, an aorist passive subjunctive) may also be translated “find yourselves”—“lest you find yourselves fighting against God.” The Jewish leader Gamaliel is shown contemplating the other possible alternative about what is occurring.</p></p>
<p id="n44005106"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They were convinced by him.” This passive construction was converted to an active one (“He convinced them”) in keeping with contemporary English style. The phrase “He convinced them” is traditionally placed in Acts 5:40 by most English translations; the standard Greek critical text (represented by NA<sup>28</sup> and UBS<sup>5</sup>) places it at the end of v. 39.</p></p>
<p id="n44005107"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Had them beaten</i>. The punishment was the “forty lashes minus one,” see also Acts 22:19; 2 Cor 11:24; Mark 13:9. The apostles had disobeyed the religious authorities and took their punishment for their “disobedience” (Deut 25:2-3; <i>m. Makkot</i> 3:10-14). In Acts 4:18 they were warned. Now they are <i>beaten</i>. The hostility is rising as the narrative unfolds.</p></p>
<p id="n44005108"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “Then” is supplied as the beginning of a new sentence in the translation. The construction in Greek has so many clauses (most of them made up of participles) that a continuous English sentence would be very awkward.</p></p>
<p id="n44005109"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005109">109</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, <i>considered worthy</i> by God. They “gloried in their shame” of honoring Jesus with their testimony (Luke 6:22-23; 2 Macc 6:30).</p></p>
<p id="n44005110"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005110">110</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The name</i> refers to the name of Jesus (cf. 3 John 7).</p></p>
<p id="n44005111"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “temple.” This is actually a reference to the courts surrounding the temple proper and has been translated accordingly.</p></p>
<p id="n44005112"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “teaching and evangelizing.” They were still obeying God, not men (see 4:18-20; 5:29).</p></p>
<p id="n44005113"><a href="file1067.xhtml#n44005113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:31.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
