<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Galatians 6</h2>
<p id="n480061"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n480061">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:11.</p></p>
<p id="n480062"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n480062">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used in a generic sense, referring to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n480063"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n480063">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “some transgression” (L&amp;N 88.297).</p></p>
<p id="n480064"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n480064">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Who are spiritual</i> refers to people who are controlled and directed by God’s Spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n480065"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n480065">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with a gentle spirit” or “gently.”</p></p>
<p id="n480066"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n480066">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “taking careful notice.”</p></p>
<p id="n480067"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n480067">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “determine the genuineness of.”</p></p>
<p id="n480068"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n480068">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he will have a reason for boasting.”</p></p>
<p id="n480069"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n480069">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and not in regard to.” The idea of comparison is implied in the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4800610"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “each one must carry.” A number of modern translations treat <span class="greek">βαστάσει</span> (<span class="translit">bastasei</span>) as an imperatival future.</p></p>
<p id="n4800611"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “instructs,” “imparts.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800612"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is not mocked,” “will not be ridiculed” (L&amp;N 33.409). BDAG 660 s.v. <span class="greek">μυκτηρίζω</span> has “of God <span class="greek">οὐ μ</span>. <i>he is not to be mocked, treated w. contempt,</i> perh. <i>outwitted</i> Gal 6:7.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800613"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used in a generic sense, referring to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n4800614"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 915 s.v. <span class="greek">σάρξ</span> 2.c.<span class="greek">α</span> states: “In Paul’s thought esp., all parts of the body constitute a totality known as <span class="greek">σ</span>. or <i>flesh</i>, which is dominated by sin to such a degree that wherever flesh is, all forms of sin are likew. present, and no good thing can live in the <span class="greek">σάρξ</span>…Gal 5:13, 24; …Opp. <span class="greek">τὸ πνεῦμα</span>…Gal 3:3; 5:16, 17ab; 6:8ab.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800615"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “destruction.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800616"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the previous occurrence of the word “flesh” in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4800617"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “not become discouraged,” “not lose heart” (L&amp;N 25.288).</p></p>
<p id="n4800618"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “if we do not become extremely weary,” “if we do not give out,” “if we do not faint from exhaustion” (L&amp;N 23.79).</p></p>
<p id="n4800619"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is a double connective here that cannot be easily preserved in English: “consequently therefore,” emphasizing the conclusion of what Paul has been arguing.</p></p>
<p id="n4800620"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to those who are members of the family of [the] faith.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800621"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the flesh.” L&amp;N 88.236 translates the phrase “those who force you to be circumcised are those who wish to make a good showing in external matters.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800622"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800622">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to be circumcised, only.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started with the words “They do so,” which were supplied to make a complete English sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n4800623"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800623">23</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ <i>Grk</i> “so that they will not be persecuted.” The indicative after <span class="greek">ἵνα μή</span> (<span class="translit">hina mē</span>) is unusual (though not unexampled elsewhere in the NT), making it the harder reading. The evidence is fairly evenly split between the indicative <span class="greek">διώκονται</span> (<span class="translit">diōkontai</span>; <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> A C F G K L P 0278 6 81 104 326 629 1175 1241 1505 2464 <i>pm</i>) and the subjunctive <span class="greek">διώκωνται</span> (<span class="translit">diōkōntai</span>; <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 365 1739 <i>pm</i>), with a slight preference for the subjunctive. However, since scribes would tend to change the indicative to a subjunctive due to syntactical requirements, the internal evidence is decidedly on the side of the indicative, suggesting that it is the autographic wording.</p></p>
<p id="n4800624"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “boast about you in external matters,” “in the outward rite” (cf. v. 12).</p></p>
<p id="n4800625"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800625">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “through whom,” referring to the Lord Jesus Christ rather than the cross.</p></p>
<p id="n4800626"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800626">26</a> <p><b>tc</b> The phrase “in Christ Jesus” is found after “For” in some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D F G 0278 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat bo), but lacking in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1505 1739* and several fathers. The longer reading probably represents a scribal harmonization to Gal 5:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4800627"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800628"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800628">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but a new creation”; the words “the only thing that matters” have been supplied to reflect the implied contrast with the previous clause (see also Gal 5:6).</p></p>
<p id="n4800629"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800629">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The same Greek verb, <span class="greek">στοιχέω</span> (<span class="translit">stoicheō</span>), occurs in Gal 5:25.</p></p>
<p id="n4800630"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “and” (<span class="greek">καί</span>) can be interpreted in two ways: (1) It could be rendered as “also” which would indicate that two distinct groups are in view, namely “all who will behave in accordance with this rule” and “the Israel of God.” Or (2) it could be rendered “even,” which would indicate that “all who behave in accordance with this rule” <i>are</i> “the Israel of God.” In other words, in this latter view, “even” = “that is.”</p></p>
<p id="n4800631"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800631">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Paul is probably referring to scars from wounds received in the service of Jesus, although the term <span class="greek">στίγμα</span> (<span class="translit">stigma</span>) may imply ownership and suggest these scars served as brands (L&amp;N 8.55; 33.481; 90.84).</p></p>
<p id="n4800632"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is.” No verb is stated, but a wish (“be”) rather than a declarative statement (“is”) is most likely in a concluding greeting such as this.</p></p>
<p id="n4800633"><a href="file1145.xhtml#n4800633">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:11.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
