<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n530031"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n530031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n530032"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n530032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the word of the Lord.”</p><p><b>sn</b> “The word of the Lord” is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; Luke 22:61, Acts 11:16, 1 Pet 1:25) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; here and in Acts 8:25; 13:44, 48, 49; 15:35, 36; 16:32; 19:10, 20; 1 Thess 1:8; 4:15). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said. Here the phrase has been translated “the Lord’s message” because of the focus upon the spread of the gospel evident in the passage.</p></p>
<p id="n530033"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n530033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “may run and be glorified.”</p></p>
<p id="n530034"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n530034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.”</p></p>
<p id="n530035"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n530035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive in the phrase <span class="greek">τὴν ἀγάπην τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tēn agapēn tou theou</span>, “the love of God”) could be translated as either a subjective genitive (“God’s love”) or an objective genitive (“your love for God”). Either is grammatically possible. This is possibly an instance of a plenary genitive (see <i>ExSyn</i> 119-21; M. Zerwick, <i>Biblical Greek</i>, §§36-39). If so, the emphasis would be on believers being directed toward the love God gives which in turn produces increased love in them for him. </p></p>
<p id="n530036"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n530036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive in the phrase <span class="greek">τὴν ὑπομονὴν τοῦ Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tēn hupomonēn tou Christou</span>, “the endurance of Christ”) could be translated as either a subjective genitive (“Christ’s endurance”) or an objective genitive (“endurance for Christ”). Either is grammatically possible. This is possibly an instance of a plenary genitive (see <i>ExSyn</i> 119-21; M. Zerwick, <i>Biblical Greek</i>, §§36-39). If so, the emphasis would be on believers being directed toward the endurance Christ showed which in turn produces endurance in them for him.</p></p>
<p id="n530037"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n530037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n530038"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n530038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “unruly, out of line.” The particular violation Paul has in mind is idleness (as described in vv. 8-11), so this could be translated to reflect that.</p></p>
<p id="n530039"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n530039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “walking in an undisciplined way” (“walking” is a common NT idiom for one’s way of life or conduct).</p></p>
<p id="n5300310"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300310">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading “you received” (<span class="greek">παρελάβετε</span>, <span class="translit">parelabete</span>) is found predominately in Western witnesses (F G), although the support of B and the Sahidic version (along with 1505 2464) strengthens the reading considerably. The reading “they received” is found in two different forms: <span class="greek">παρελάβοσαν</span> (<span class="translit">parelabosan</span>; in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A [D*] 0278 33) and <span class="greek">παρέλαβον</span> (<span class="translit">parelabon</span>; in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span>). (<span class="greek">παρέλαβον</span> is evidently a correction of <span class="greek">παρελάβοσαν</span> to the more common spelling for the third person aorist form). The external evidence is divided fairly evenly, with <span class="greek">παρελάβετε</span> and <span class="greek">παρελάβοσαν</span> each having adequate support. Internal evidence leans toward “they received”: Given the second person reading, there is little reason why scribes would intentionally change it to a third person plural, and especially an archaic form at that. There is ample reason, however, for scribes to change the third person form to the second person form given that in the prior context <span class="greek">παράδοσις</span> (<span class="translit">paradosis</span>, “tradition”) is used with a relative clause (as here) with a second person verb (see 2:15). The third person form should be regarded as authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n5300311"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is the verbal form of the words occurring in vv. 6 and 11, meaning “to act out of line, in an unruly way.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300312"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “we did not eat bread freely from anyone.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300313"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but working,” as a continuation of the previous sentence. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started with the word “Instead” in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5300314"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “an example for you to imitate us.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300315"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “walking in an undisciplined way” (“walking” is a common NT idiom for one’s way of life or conduct).</p></p>
<p id="n5300316"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is a play on words in the Greek: “working at nothing, but working around,” “not keeping busy but being busybodies.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300317"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that by working quietly they may eat their own bread.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300318"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n5300319"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, as a fellow believer.</p></p>
<p id="n5300320"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The greeting in my hand, Paul, which is a sign in every letter, thus I write.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Up to 3:17 the letter was dictated by Paul but written down by a secretary or amanuensis. But Paul took up the pen and wrote vv. 17-18 personally to authenticate that it was his (<i>how I write in every letter</i>). See similar indications in 1 Cor 16:21; Gal 6:11; and Col 4:18.</p></p>
<p id="n5300321"><a href="file1172.xhtml#n5300321">21</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including some early and significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 1505 1881<sup>c</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy bo), conclude this letter with <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”). Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Further, the witnesses for the omission are among the best <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B 0278 6 33 1739 1881* 2464 sa), giving sufficient base to prefer the shorter reading.</p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
