<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 12</h2>
<p id="n420121"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n420121">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase <span class="greek">ἐν οἷς</span> (<span class="translit">en hois</span>) can be translated “meanwhile.”</p></p>
<p id="n420122"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n420122">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n420123"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n420123">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to L&amp;N 27.59, “to pay attention to, to keep on the lookout for, to be alert for, to be on your guard against.” This is another Lukan present imperative calling for constant vigilance.</p></p>
<p id="n420124"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n420124">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n420125"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n420125">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The pursuit of popularity can lead to <i>hypocrisy</i>, if one is not careful.</p></p>
<p id="n420126"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n420126">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “concealed.”</p></p>
<p id="n420127"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n420127">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> I.e., <i>be revealed</i> by God. The passive voice verbs here (“be revealed,” be made known”) see the revelation as coming from God. The text is both a warning about bad things being revealed and an encouragement that good things will be made known, though the stress with the images of darkness and what is hidden in vv. 2-3 is on the attempt to conceal.</p></p>
<p id="n420128"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n420128">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because.” Understanding this verse as a result of v. 2 is a slightly better reading of the context. Knowing what is coming should impact our behavior now.</p></p>
<p id="n420129"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n420129">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “spoken in the ear,” an idiom. The contemporary expression is “whispered.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201210"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201210">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term translated <i>private rooms</i> refers to the inner room of a house, normally without any windows opening outside, the most private location possible (BDAG 988 s.v. <span class="greek">ταμεῖον</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4201211"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression “proclaimed from the housetops” is an idiom for proclaiming something publicly (L&amp;N 7.51). Roofs of many first century Jewish houses in Judea and Galilee were flat and had access either from outside or from within the house. Something shouted from atop a house would be heard by everyone in the street below.</p></p>
<p id="n4201212"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201213"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201213">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> Judaism had a similar exhortation in 4 Macc 13:14-15.</p></p>
<p id="n4201214"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will show,” but in this reflective context such a demonstration is a warning or exhortation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201215"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201215">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> The actual performer of the killing is not here specified. It could be understood to be God (so NASB, NRSV) but it could simply emphasize that, after a killing has taken place, it is God who casts the person into hell.</p></p>
<p id="n4201216"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The direct object (“you”) is understood.</p></p>
<p id="n4201217"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201217">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> The word translated <i>hell</i> is “Gehenna” (<span class="greek">γέεννα</span>, <span class="translit">geenna</span>), a Greek transliteration of the Hebrew words <i>ge hinnom</i> (“Valley of Hinnom”). This was the valley along the south side of Jerusalem. In OT times it was used for human sacrifices to the pagan god Molech (cf. Jer 7:31; 19:5-6; 32:35), and it came to be used as a place where human excrement and rubbish were disposed of and burned. In the intertestamental period, it came to be used symbolically as the place of divine punishment (cf. <i>1 En</i>. 27:2; 90:26; <i>4 Ezra</i> 7:36).</p></p>
<p id="n4201218"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201218">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>pennies</i> refer to the assarion, a small Roman copper coin. One of them was worth one sixteenth of a denarius or less than a half hour’s average wage. <i>Sparrows</i> were the cheapest thing sold in the market. The point of Jesus’ statement is that God knows about even the most financially insignificant things; see Isa 49:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4201219"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201219">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a typical form of rabbinic argumentation, from the lesser to the greater: If God cares about the lesser thing (sparrows) how much more does he care about the greater thing (people).</p></p>
<p id="n4201220"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201220">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> This represents the second call by Jesus not to be <i>afraid</i> in the section (previously in v. 4). Since the previous reference was related to fear of persecution, it is probable that this one does as well. Once again the <i>sparrows</i> are mentioned and the argument is from lesser to greater (if God cares about individual hairs on the head and about sparrows, how much more does he care about people).</p></p>
<p id="n4201221"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201222"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “confesses.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201223"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although this is a generic reference and includes both males and females, in this context “men” has been retained because of the wordplay with the Son of Man and the contrast with the angels. The same is true of the occurrence of “men” in v. 9.</p></p>
<p id="n4201224"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201224">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> This acknowledgment will take place at the judgment. Of course, the <i>Son of Man</i> is a reference to Jesus as it has been throughout the Gospel. On Jesus and judgment, see 22:69; Acts 10:42-43; 17:31.</p></p>
<p id="n4201225"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201225">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> Blasphemy <i>against the Holy Spirit</i> probably refers to a total rejection of the testimony that the Spirit gives to Jesus and the plan of God. This is not so much a sin of the moment as of one’s entire life, an obstinate rejection of God’s message and testimony. Cf. Matt 12:31-32 and Mark 3:28-30.</p></p>
<p id="n4201226"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it will not be forgiven the person who blasphemes against the Holy Spirit.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201227"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201227">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> The saying looks at persecution both from a Jewish context as the mention of <i>synagogues</i> suggests, and from a Gentile one as the reference to <i>the rulers and the authorities</i> suggests.</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogues</i> in 4:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4201228"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and the,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4201229"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about how or what you should say in your defense,” but this is redundant with the following clause, “or what you should say.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201230"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in that very hour” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4201231"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “what it is necessary to say.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201232"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201233"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201233">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Tell my brother</i>. In 1st century Jewish culture, a figure like a rabbi was often asked to mediate disputes, except that here mediation was not requested, but representation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201234"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201235"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term of address can be harsh or gentle depending on the context (BDAG 82 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> 8). Here it is a rebuke.</p></p>
<p id="n4201236"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The pronoun <span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">humas</span>) is plural, referring to both the man and his brother; thus the translation “you two.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201237"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201238"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> See L&amp;N 13.154 for this use of the middle voice of <span class="greek">φυλάσσω</span> (<span class="translit">phulassō</span>) in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4201239"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “avarice,” “covetousness.” Note the warning covers more than money and gets at the root attitude—the strong desire to acquire more and more possessions and experiences.</p></p>
<p id="n4201240"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201240">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the connection to the preceding statement. </p></p>
<p id="n4201241"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a parable, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4201242"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “yielded a plentiful harvest.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201243"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that this is a result of the preceding statement. </p></p>
<p id="n4201244"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201244">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to himself, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4201245"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201245">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I have nowhere to store my crops</i>. The thinking here is prudent in terms of recognizing the problem. The issue in the parable will be the rich man’s solution, particularly the arrogance reflected in v. 19.</p></p>
<p id="n4201246"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201247"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201247">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note how often the first person pronoun is present in these verses. The farmer is totally self absorbed. </p></p>
<p id="n4201248"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to my soul,” which is repeated as a vocative in the following statement, but is left untranslated as redundant.</p></p>
<p id="n4201249"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201249">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “your soul,” but <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) is frequently used of one’s physical life. It clearly has that meaning in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201250"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201250">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “required back.” This term, <span class="greek">ἀπαιτέω</span> (<span class="translit">apaiteō</span>), has an economic feel to it and is often used of a debt being called in for repayment (BDAG 96 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4201251"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the things you have prepared, whose will they be?” The words “for yourself” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4201252"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201252">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> It is selfishness that is rebuked here, in the accumulation of <i>riches for himself</i>. Recall the emphasis on the first person pronouns throughout the parable.</p></p>
<p id="n4201253"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201253">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative. Jesus’ remarks to the disciples are an application of the point made in the previous parable. </p></p>
<p id="n4201254"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201254">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201255"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201255">55</a> <p><b>tc</b> <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">autou</span>, “his”) is lacking in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45vid,75</sup> B 1241 c e. Although the addition of clarifying pronouns is a known scribal alteration, in this case it is probably better to view the dropping of the pronoun as the alteration in light of its minimal attestation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201256"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201256">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “do not be anxious.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201257"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201257">57</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 070 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) supply the pronoun <span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">humōn</span>, “your”) here, although several significant and early witnesses omit it (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B D L Q W <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 700 2542 <i>al</i> lat). Externally, the shorter reading is superior. Internally, the pronoun looks to be a scribal clarification. In context the article can be translated as a possessive pronoun anyway (<i>ExSyn</i> 215), as it has been done for this translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201258"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201258">58</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B 070 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 1424 <i>al</i>) supply the pronoun <span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">humōn</span>, “your”) here, although the witnesses for the omission are early, significant, and varied (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45vid,75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D L Q W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat). See previous <b>tc</b> note for more discussion.</p></p>
<p id="n4201259"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201259">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “crows.” Crows and ravens belong to the same family of birds. English uses “crow” as a general word for the family. Palestine has several indigenous members of the crow family.</p></p>
<p id="n4201260"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201260">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “God gives them food to eat.” L&amp;N 23.6 has both “to provide food for” and “to give food to someone to eat.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201261"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201261">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “by being anxious.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201262"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201262">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a cubit to his height.” A cubit (<span class="greek">πῆχυς</span>, <span class="translit">pēchus</span>) can measure length (normally about 45 cm or 18 inches) or time (a small unit, “hour” is usually used [BDAG 812 s.v.] although “day” has been suggested [L&amp;N 67.151]). The term <span class="greek">ἡλικία</span> (<span class="translit">hēlikia</span>) is ambiguous in the same way as <span class="greek">πῆχυς</span>. Most scholars take the term <span class="greek">ἡλικία</span> (<span class="translit">hēlikia</span>) to describe age or length of life here, although a few refer it to bodily stature (see BDAG 435-36 s.v. 1.a for discussion). Worry about length of life seems a more natural figure than worry about height. However, the point either way is clear: Worrying adds nothing to life span or height.</p></p>
<p id="n4201263"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201263">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a first class condition in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n4201264"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201264">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “why are you anxious for.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201265"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201265">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “lilies.” According to L&amp;N 3.32, “Though traditionally <span class="greek">κρίνον</span> has been regarded as a type of lily, scholars have suggested several other possible types of flowers, including an anemone, a poppy, a gladiolus, and a rather inconspicuous type of daisy.” In view of the uncertainty, the more generic “flowers” has been used in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201266"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201266">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “toil.” Although it might be argued that “work hard” would be a more precise translation of <span class="greek">κοπιάω</span> (<span class="translit">kopiaō</span>) here, the line in English scans better in terms of cadence with a single syllable.</p></p>
<p id="n4201267"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201267">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a first class condition in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n4201268"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201268">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “grass in the field.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201269"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201269">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which is in the field today.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201270"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201270">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “into the oven.” The expanded translation “into the fire to heat the oven” has been used to avoid misunderstanding; most items put into modern ovens are put there to be baked, not burned.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The oven</i> was most likely a rounded clay oven used for baking bread, which was heated by burning wood and dried grass.</p></p>
<p id="n4201271"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201271">71</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>how much more</i> is a typical form of rabbinic argumentation, from the lesser to the greater. If God cares for the little things, surely he will care for the more important things.</p></p>
<p id="n4201272"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201272">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate a conclusion drawn from the previous illustrations. </p></p>
<p id="n4201273"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201273">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do not seek,” but this could be misunderstood to mean that people should make no attempt to obtain their food. The translation “do not be overly concerned” attempts to reflect the force of the original.</p></p>
<p id="n4201274"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201274">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “about such things” have been supplied to qualify the meaning; the phrase relates to obtaining food and drink mentioned in the previous clause.</p></p>
<p id="n4201275"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201275">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seek.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201276"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201276">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seek,” but in the sense of the previous verses.</p></p>
<p id="n4201277"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201277">77</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45</sup> A D<sup>1</sup> Q W <span class="greek">Θ</span> 070 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy) read <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou theou</span>, “of God”) instead of <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">autou</span>, “his”; found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D* L <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 579 892 co). But such a clarifying reading is suspect. <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> is superior on both internal and external grounds. <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> includes neither and as such would support the translation above since the article alone can often be translated as a possessive pronoun.</p></p>
<p id="n4201278"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201278">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>His</i> (that is, God’s) <i>kingdom</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n4201279"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201279">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “your Father chooses.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201280"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201280">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> The call to <i>sell your possessions</i> is a call to a lack of attachment to the earth and a generosity as a result.</p></p>
<p id="n4201281"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201281">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “give alms,” but this term is not in common use today.</p></p>
<p id="n4201282"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201282">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the heavens.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201283"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201283">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “an unfailing treasure in heaven,” or “an inexhaustible treasure in heaven.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201284"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201284">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">σής</span> (<span class="translit">sēs</span>) refers to moths in general. It is specifically the larvae of moths that destroy clothing by eating holes in it (L&amp;N 4.49; BDAG 922 s.v.). See Jas 5:2, which mentions “moth-eaten” clothing.</p></p>
<p id="n4201285"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201285">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> Seeking heavenly <i>treasure</i> means serving others and honoring God by doing so; see Luke 6:35-36.</p></p>
<p id="n4201286"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201286">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Let your loins be girded,” an idiom referring to the practice of tucking the ends of the long cloak (outer garment) into the belt to shorten it in preparation for activities like running, etc.</p></p>
<p id="n4201287"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201287">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Keep your lamps burning</i> means to be ready at all times.</p></p>
<p id="n4201288"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201288">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, like slaves (who are mentioned later, vv. 37-38), although the term <span class="greek">ἀνθρώποις</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpois</span>) is used here. Since in this context it appears generic rather than gender-specific, the translation “people” is employed.</p></p>
<p id="n4201289"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201289">89</a> <p><b>sn</b> An ancient <i>wedding celebration</i> could last for days (Tob 11:18).</p></p>
<p id="n4201290"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201290">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 7:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4201291"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201291">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “watching”; <i>Grk</i> “awake,” but in context this is not just being awake but alert and looking out.</p></p>
<p id="n4201292"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201292">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201293"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201293">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> See v. 35 (same verb).</p></p>
<p id="n4201294"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201294">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have them recline at table,” as 1st century middle eastern meals were not eaten while sitting at a table, but while reclining on one’s side on the floor with the head closest to the low table and the feet farthest away.</p></p>
<p id="n4201295"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201295">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">παρελθών</span> (<span class="translit">parelthōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201296"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201296">96</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He…will come and wait on them</i> is a reversal of expectation, but shows that what Jesus asks for he is willing to do as well; see John 13:5 and 15:18-27, although those instances merely foreshadow what is in view here.</p></p>
<p id="n4201297"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201297">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The second or third watch of the night</i> would be between 9 p.m. and 3 a.m. on a Roman schedule and 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. on a Jewish schedule. Luke uses the four-watch schedule of the Romans in Acts 12:4, so that is more probable here. Regardless of the precise times of the watches, however, it is clear that the late-night watches when a person is least alert are in view here.</p></p>
<p id="n4201298"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201298">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “finds (them) thus,” but this has been clarified in the translation by referring to the status (“alert”) mentioned in v. 37.</p></p>
<p id="n4201299"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n4201299">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “blessed are they”; the referent (the watchful slaves, v. 37) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42012100"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012100">100</a> <p><b>sn</b> On Jesus pictured as a returning <i>thief</i>, see 1 Thess 5:2, 4; 2 Pet 3:10; Rev 3:3; 16:15.</p></p>
<p id="n42012101"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012101">101</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> A B L Q W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 070 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy<sup>p,h</sup> sa<sup>ms</sup> bo) read “he would have watched and not let” here, but this looks like an assimilation to Matt 24:43. The alliance of two significant and early <span class="smcaps">mss</span> along with a few others (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* [D] e i sy<sup>s,c</sup> sa<sup>mss</sup>), coupled with much stronger internal evidence, suggests that the shorter reading is authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n42012102"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012102">102</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus made clear that his coming could not be timed, and suggested it might take some time—so long, in fact, that some would not be looking for him any longer (<i>at an hour when you do not expect him</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n42012103"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Peter.” Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the connection to the preceding statement. </p></p>
<p id="n42012104"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012104">104</a> <p><b>sn</b> Is the parable only for disciples (<i>us</i>) or for all humanity (<i>everyone</i>)? Or does Peter mean for disciples (<i>us</i>) or for the crowd (<i>everyone</i>)? The fact that unfaithful slaves are mentioned in v. 46 looks to a warning that includes a broad audience, though it is quality of service that is addressed. This means the parable focuses on those who are associated with Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n42012105"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the Lord said.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42012106"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “administrator,” “steward” (L&amp;N 37.39).</p></p>
<p id="n42012107"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term, <span class="greek">θεραπεία</span> (<span class="translit">therapeia</span>), describes the group of servants working in a particular household (L&amp;N 46.6).</p></p>
<p id="n42012108"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 7:2.</p></p>
<p id="n42012109"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, doing his job, doing what he is supposed to be doing.</p></p>
<p id="n42012110"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀληθῶς</span>, <span class="translit">alēthōs</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n42012111"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the master) has been specified in the translation for clarity. See also Luke 19:11-27.</p></p>
<p id="n42012112"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> In the Greek text this is a third class condition that for all practical purposes is a hypothetical condition (note the translation of the following verb “should say”).</p></p>
<p id="n42012113"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “that” (<span class="greek">ἐκεῖνος</span>, <span class="translit">ekeinos</span>) is used as a catchword to list out, in the form of a number of hypothetical circumstances, what the possible responses of “that” servant could be. He could be faithful (vv. 43-44) or totally unfaithful (vv. 45-46). He does not complete his master’s will with knowledge (v. 47) or from ignorance (v 48). These differences are indicated by the different levels of punishment in vv. 46-48.</p></p>
<p id="n42012114"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “should say in his heart.”</p></p>
<p id="n42012115"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is taking a long time.”</p></p>
<p id="n42012116"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012116">116</a> <p><b>sn</b> The slave’s action in beginning <i>to beat the other slaves</i> was not only a failure to carry out what was commanded but involved doing the exact reverse.</p></p>
<p id="n42012117"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “other” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n42012118"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the menservants and the maidservants.” The term here, used in both masculine and feminine grammatical forms, is <span class="greek">παῖς</span> (<span class="translit">pais</span>), which can refer to a slave, but also to a slave who is a personal servant, and thus regarded kindly (L&amp;N 87.77).</p></p>
<p id="n42012119"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">διχοτομέω</span> (<span class="translit">dichotomeō</span>) means to cut an object into two parts (L&amp;N 19.19). This is an extremely severe punishment compared to the other two later punishments. To translate it simply as “punish” is too mild. If taken literally this servant is dismembered, although it is possible to view the stated punishment as hyperbole (L&amp;N 38.12).</p></p>
<p id="n42012120"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “unbelieving.” Here the translation employs the slightly more ambiguous “unfaithful,” which creates a link with the point of the parable—faithfulness versus unfaithfulness in servants. The example of this verse must be taken together with the examples of vv. 47-48 as part of a scale of reactions with the most disobedient response coming here. The fact that this servant is placed in a distinct group, unlike the one in vv. 47-48, also suggests ultimate exclusion. This is the hypocrite of Matt 24:51.</p></p>
<p id="n42012121"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42012122"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “or do according to his will”; the referent (the master) has been specified in the translation for clarity. This example deals with the slave who knew what the command was and yet failed to complete it.</p></p>
<p id="n42012123"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “did not know”; the phrase “his master’s will” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the contemporary English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n42012124"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “blows.”</p></p>
<p id="n42012125"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will receive few (blows).”</p></p>
<p id="n42012126"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “required from him,” but the words “from him” are redundant in English and have not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42012127"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012127">127</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Entrusted with much</i>. To be gifted with precious responsibility is something that requires faithfulness.</p></p>
<p id="n42012128"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they will ask even more.”</p></p>
<p id="n42012129"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012129">129</a> <p><b>sn</b> This mission statement, “<i>I have come to bring fire on the earth</i>,” looks to the purging and division Jesus causes: See Luke 3:9, 17; 9:54; 17:29 for fire, 5:32; 7:34; 9:58; 12:51 for the topic of mission.</p></p>
<p id="n42012130"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “cast.” For <span class="greek">βάλλω</span> (<span class="translit">ballō</span>) in the sense of causing a state or condition, see L&amp;N 13.14.</p></p>
<p id="n42012131"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012131">131</a> <p><b>sn</b> The figure of the <i>baptism</i> is variously interpreted, as some see a reference (1) to martyrdom or (2) to inundation with God’s judgment. The OT background, however, suggests the latter sense: Jesus is about to be uniquely inundated with God’s judgment as he is rejected, persecuted, and killed (Pss 18:4, 16; 42:7; 69:1-2; Isa 8:7-8; 30:27-28; Jonah 2:3-6).</p></p>
<p id="n42012132"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to be baptized with.”</p></p>
<p id="n42012133"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “hostility.” This term pictures dissension and hostility (BDAG 234 s.v. <span class="greek">διαμερισμός</span>).</p><p><b>sn</b> For rhetorical reasons, Jesus’ statement is deliberately paradoxical (seeming to state the opposite of Matt 10:13, for example, where the messengers are to bring peace). The conflict implied by the <i>division</i> (the parallel in Matt 10:34 has “sword”) is not primarily eschatological in this context, however, but immediate, and concerns the hostility and discord even among family members that a person’s allegiance to Jesus would bring (vv. 52-53).</p></p>
<p id="n42012134"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012134">134</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>From now on</i> is a popular phrase in Luke: 1:48; 5:10; 22:18, 69; see Mic 7:6.</p></p>
<p id="n42012135"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is dispute whether this phrase belongs to the end of v. 52 or begins v. 53. Given the shift of object, a connection to v. 53 is slightly preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n42012136"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “also” and <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42012137"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012137">137</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>A cloud rising in the west</i> refers to moisture coming from the Mediterranean Sea.</p></p>
<p id="n42012138"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">ὄμβρος</span> (<span class="translit">ombros</span>) refers to heavy rain, such as in a thunderstorm (L&amp;N 14.12).</p></p>
<p id="n42012139"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012139">139</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The south wind</i> comes from the desert, and thus brings scorching heat.</p></p>
<p id="n42012140"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012140">140</a> <p><b>sn</b> In Luke, the term <i>hypocrites</i> occurs here, in 6:42, and in 13:15.</p></p>
<p id="n42012141"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012141">141</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45</sup> A W <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat) have a syntax here that reflects a slightly different rhetorical question: “but how do you not interpret the present time?” The reading behind the translation, however, has overall superior support: <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L <span class="greek">Θ</span> 33 892 1241.</p></p>
<p id="n42012142"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012142">142</a> <p><b>tn</b> Jesus calls for some personal reflection. However, this unit probably does connect to the previous one—thus the translation of <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) here as “And”—to make a good spiritual assessment, thus calling for application to the spiritual, rather than personal, realm.</p></p>
<p id="n42012143"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012143">143</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>magistrate</i> (<span class="greek">ἄρχων</span>, <span class="translit">archōn</span>) refers to an official who, under the authority of the government, serves as judge in legal cases (see L&amp;N 56.29).</p></p>
<p id="n42012144"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012144">144</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>officer</i> (<span class="greek">πράκτωρ</span>, <span class="translit">praktōr</span>) was a civil official who functioned like a bailiff and was in charge of debtor’s prison. The use of the term, however, does not automatically demand a Hellenistic setting (BDAG 859 s.v.; K. H. Rengstorf, <i>TDNT</i> 8:539; C. Maurer, <i>TDNT</i> 6:642).</p></p>
<p id="n42012145"><a href="file1027.xhtml#n42012145">145</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the English word “cent” is used as opposed to the parallel in Matt 5:26 where “penny” appears, since the Greek word there is different and refers to a different but similar coin.</p><p><b>sn</b> This <i>cent</i> was a lepton, the smallest coin available. It was copper or bronze, worth one-half of a quadrans or 1/128 of a denarius. The parallel in Matt 5:26 mentions the quadrans instead of the lepton. The illustration refers to the debt one owes God and being sure to settle with him in the right time, before it is too late. Some interpreters, however, consider it to be like Matt 5:26, which has similar imagery but a completely different context.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
