<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Hebrews 12</h2>
<p id="n580121"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n580121">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having such a great cloud of witnesses surrounding us.”</p></p>
<p id="n580122"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n580122">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Because of”; or “Instead of.” The Greek prepostion can be understood either way. For discussion and sources see Wallace, <i>ExSyn</i> 367-68; cf. also BDAG 88 s.v. 1, “<i>instead of, in place of</i>” and s.v. 3 “<i>(in exchange) for</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n580123"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n580123">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 110:1.</p></p>
<p id="n580124"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n580124">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “until blood.”</p></p>
<p id="n580125"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n580125">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “disregard,” “think little of.”</p></p>
<p id="n580126"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n580126">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “reproves,” “rebukes.” The Greek verb <span class="greek">ἐλέγχω</span> (<span class="translit">elenchō</span>) implies exposing someone’s sin in order to bring correction.</p></p>
<p id="n580127"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n580127">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Prov 3:11-12.</p></p>
<p id="n580128"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n580128">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “endure,” with the object (“your suffering”) understood from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n580129"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n580129">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in order to become disciplined.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801210"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you are without discipline.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801211"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all”; “sons” is implied by the context.</p></p>
<p id="n5801212"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “we had our earthly fathers as discipliners.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801213"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the fathers of our flesh.” In Hebrews, “flesh” is a characteristic way of speaking about outward, physical, earthly life (cf. Heb 5:7; 9:10, 13), as opposed to the inward or spiritual dimensions of life.</p></p>
<p id="n5801214"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and live.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Submit ourselves…to the Father of spirits and receive life</i>. This idea is drawn from Proverbs, where the Lord’s discipline brings life, while resistance to it leads to death (cf. Prov 4:13; 6:23; 10:17; 16:17).</p></p>
<p id="n5801215"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all discipline at the time does not seem to be of joy, but of sorrow.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801216"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the peaceful fruit of righteousness.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801217"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “straighten.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801218"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801218">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 35:3. <i>Strengthen your listless hands and your weak knees</i> refers to the readers’ need for renewed resolve and fresh strength in their struggles (cf. Heb 10:36-39; 12:1-3).</p></p>
<p id="n5801219"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801219">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Prov 4:26. The phrase <i>make straight paths for your feet</i> is figurative for “stay on God’s paths.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801220"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801220">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> The references to <i>peace</i> and <i>holiness</i> show the close connection between this paragraph and the previous one. The pathway toward “holiness” and the need for it is cited in Heb 12:10 and 14. More importantly Prov 4:26-27 sets up the transition from one paragraph to the next: It urges people to stay on godly paths (Prov 4:26, quoted here in v. 13) and promises that God will lead them in peace if they do so (Prov 4:27 [LXX], quoted in v. 14).</p></p>
<p id="n5801221"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that there not be any root of bitterness,” but referring figuratively to a person who causes trouble (as in Deut 29:17 [LXX] from which this is quoted).</p><p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Deut 29:18.</p></p>
<p id="n5801222"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that there not be any,” continuing from v. 15.</p></p>
<p id="n5801223"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801223">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Gen 27:34-41.</p></p>
<p id="n5801224"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or a command: “for understand that.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801225"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it,” referring either to the repentance or the blessing. But the account in Gen 27:34-41 (which the author appeals to here) makes it clear that the blessing is what Esau sought. Thus in the translation the referent (the blessing) is specified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5801226"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> This describes the nation of Israel approaching God on Mt. Sinai (Exod 19). There is a clear contrast with the reference to Mount Zion in v. 22, so this could be translated “a mountain that can be touched.” But the word “mountain” does not occur here and the more vague description seems to be deliberate.</p></p>
<p id="n5801227"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a voice of words.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801228"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a voice…from which those who heard begged that a word not be added to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801229"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801229">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 19:12-13.</p></p>
<p id="n5801230"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that which appeared.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801231"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I am terrified and trembling.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 9:19.</p></p>
<p id="n5801232"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and the city”; the conjunction is omitted in translation since it seems to be functioning epexegetically—that is, explaining further what is meant by “Mount Zion.” </p></p>
<p id="n5801233"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">μεσίτης</span> (<span class="translit">mesitēs</span>, “mediator”) in this context does not imply that Jesus was a mediator in the contemporary sense of the word, i.e., he worked for compromise between opposing parties. Here the term describes his function as the one who was used by God to enact a new covenant which established a new relationship between God and his people, but entirely on God’s terms.</p></p>
<p id="n5801234"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801234">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> Abel’s shed blood cried out to the Lord for justice and judgment, but Jesus’ blood speaks of redemption and forgiveness, <i>something better than Abel’s does</i> (Gen 4:10; Heb 9:11-14; 11:4).</p></p>
<p id="n5801235"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801235">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Hag 2:6.</p></p>
<p id="n5801236"><a href="file1203.xhtml#n5801236">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 4:24; 9:3.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
