<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 18</h2>
<p id="n400181"><a href="file987.xhtml#n400181">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n400182"><a href="file987.xhtml#n400182">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of the comparison <i>become like little children</i> has more to do with a child’s trusting spirit, as well as willingness to be dependent and receive from others, than any inherent humility the child might possess.</p></p>
<p id="n400183"><a href="file987.xhtml#n400183">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> The negation in Greek (<span class="greek">οὐ μή</span>, <span class="translit">ou mē</span>) is very strong here.</p></p>
<p id="n400184"><a href="file987.xhtml#n400184">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb, <span class="greek">δέχομαι</span> (<span class="translit">dechomai</span>), is a term of hospitality (L&amp;N 34.53).</p></p>
<p id="n400185"><a href="file987.xhtml#n400185">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">σκανδαλίζω</span> (<span class="translit">skandalizō</span>), translated here “causes to sin” can also be translated “offends” or “causes to stumble.”</p></p>
<p id="n400186"><a href="file987.xhtml#n400186">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the millstone of a donkey.” This refers to a large flat stone turned by a donkey in the process of grinding grain (BDAG 661 s.v. <span class="greek">μύλος</span> 2; L&amp;N 7.68-69). The same term is used in the parallel account in Mark 9:42.</p><p><b>sn</b> The punishment of drowning with a heavy weight attached is extremely gruesome and reflects Jesus’ views concerning those who cause others who believe in him to sin.</p></p>
<p id="n400187"><a href="file987.xhtml#n400187">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term translated “open” here (<span class="greek">πελάγει</span>, <span class="translit">pelagei</span>) refers to the open sea as opposed to a stretch of water near a coastline (BDAG 794 s.v. <span class="greek">πέλαγος</span>). A similar English expression would be “the high seas.”</p></p>
<p id="n400188"><a href="file987.xhtml#n400188">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For it.” Here <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400189"><a href="file987.xhtml#n400189">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001810"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001810">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> In Greek there is a wordplay that is difficult to reproduce in English here. The verb translated “causes…to sin” (<span class="greek">σκανδαλίζω</span>, <span class="translit">skandalizō</span>) comes from the same root as the word translated “stumbling blocks” (<span class="greek">σκάνδαλον</span>, <span class="translit">skandalon</span>) in the previous verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4001811"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001811">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “than having.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001812"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001812">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “than having.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001813"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001813">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Gehenna of fire.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>hell</i> in 5:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4001814"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001814">14</a> <p><b>tc</b> The most significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, along with others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L* <span class="greek">Θ</span>* ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33 892* e ff<sup>1</sup> sy<sup>s</sup> sa), do not include <b>18:11</b> “For the Son of Man came to save the lost.” The verse is included in D L<sup>mg</sup> N W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span><sup>c</sup> 078<sup>vid</sup> 565 579 700 892<sup>c</sup> 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy<sup>c,p,h</sup>, but is almost certainly not original, being borrowed from the parallel in Luke 19:10. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number as well, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n4001815"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a certain man.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used here in a somewhat generic sense.</p></p>
<p id="n4001816"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001816">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> This individual with <i>a hundred sheep</i> is a shepherd of modest means, as flocks often had up to two hundred head of sheep.</p></p>
<p id="n4001817"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001817">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Look for the one that went astray</i>. The parable pictures God’s pursuit of the sinner. On the image of Jesus as the Good Shepherd, see John 10:1-18.</p></p>
<p id="n4001818"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001818">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001819"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001819">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated. All the “if” clauses in this paragraph are third class conditions in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n4001820"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001820">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term “brother” can mean “fellow believer” or “fellow Christian” (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 2.a) whether male or female. It can also refer to siblings, though here it is used in a broader sense to connote familial relationships within the family of God. Therefore, because of the familial connotations, “brother” has been retained in the translation here in preference to the more generic “fellow believer” (“fellow Christian” would be anachronistic in this context).</p></p>
<p id="n4001821"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001821">21</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The earliest and best witnesses lack “against you” after “if your brother sins.” It is quite possible that the shorter reading in these witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B, as well as 0281 ƒ<sup>1</sup> 579 sa) occurred when scribes either intentionally changed the text (to make it more universal in application) or unintentionally changed the text (owing to the similar sound of the end of the verb <span class="greek">ἁμαρτήσῃ</span> [<span class="translit">hamartēsē</span>] and the prepositional phrase <span class="greek">εἰς σέ</span> [<span class="translit">eis se</span>]). However, if the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> were normally copied by sight rather than by sound, especially in the early centuries of Christianity, such an unintentional change is not as likely for these <span class="smcaps">mss</span>. And since scribes normally added material rather than deleted it for intentional changes, on balance, the shorter reading appears to be autographic. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the words in brackets, indicating doubts as to their authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4001822"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001822">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “go reprove him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001823"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001823">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 19:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4001824"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001824">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001825"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001825">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001826"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001826">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let him be to you as.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001827"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001827">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a pagan.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001828"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001828">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> To <i>treat him like a Gentile or a tax collector</i> means not to associate with such a person. See the note on <i>tax collectors</i> in 5:46.</p></p>
<p id="n4001829"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001829">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001830"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001830">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001831"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001831">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if two of you…agree about whatever they ask, it will be done for them by my Father who is in heaven.” The passive construction has been translated as an active one in keeping with contemporary English style, and the pronouns, which change from second person plural to third person plural in the Greek text, have been consistently translated as second person plural.</p></p>
<p id="n4001832"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001832">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the term “brother” means “fellow believer” or “fellow Christian” (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 2.a), whether male or female. Concerning the familial connotations, see also the note on the first occurrence of this term in v. 15.</p></p>
<p id="n4001833"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001833">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “seventy times seven,” i.e., an unlimited number of times. See L&amp;N 60.74 and 60.77 for the two possible translations of the phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n4001834"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001834">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 8:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4001835"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001835">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001836"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001836">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>talent</i> was a huge sum of money, equal to 6,000 denarii. One denarius was the usual day’s wage for a worker. L&amp;N 6.82 states, “a Greek monetary unit (also a unit of weight) with a value which fluctuated, depending upon the particular monetary system which prevailed at a particular period of time (a silver talent was worth approximately 6,000 denarii with gold talents worth at least thirty times that much).”</p></p>
<p id="n4001837"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001837">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001838"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001838">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “it” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4001839"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001839">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and his wife.”</p></p>
<p id="n4001840"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001840">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “falling therefore the slave bowed down to the ground.” The redundancy of this expression signals the desperation of the slave in begging for mercy.</p></p>
<p id="n4001841"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001841">41</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> L W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 058 0281 ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33 565 579 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it sy<sup>p,h</sup> co) begin the slave’s plea with “Lord” (<span class="greek">κύριε</span>, <span class="translit">kurie</span>), though a few key witnesses lack this vocative (B D <span class="greek">Θ</span> 700 lat sy<sup>s,c</sup> Or Chr). Understanding the parable to refer to the Lord, scribes would be naturally prone to add the vocative here, especially as the slave’s plea is a plea for mercy. Thus, the shorter reading is more likely to be authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n4001842"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001842">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001843"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001843">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “one hundred denarii.” The denarius was a silver coin worth about a day’s wage for a laborer; this would be about three month’s pay.</p></p>
<p id="n4001844"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001844">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so.” A new sentence was started at this point in the translation in keeping with the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences.</p></p>
<p id="n4001845"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001845">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he grabbed him and started choking him.” </p></p>
<p id="n4001846"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001846">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “me” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. </p></p>
<p id="n4001847"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001847">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “begged him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant here in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001848"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001848">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Therefore when.” Here <span class="greek">οὖν</span> (<span class="translit">oun</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4001849"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001849">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (the first slave mentioned in v. 24) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4001850"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001850">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “handed him over to the torturers,” referring specifically to guards whose job was to torture prisoners who were being questioned. According to L&amp;N 37.126, it is difficult to know for certain in this instance whether the term actually envisions torture as a part of the punishment or is simply a hyperbole. However, in light of the following verse and Jesus’ other warning statements in Matthew about “fiery hell,” “the outer darkness,” etc., it is best not to dismiss this as mere imagery.</p></p>
<p id="n4001851"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001851">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his.” The pronoun has been translated to follow English idiom (the last pronoun of the verse [“from <i>your</i> heart”] is second person plural in the original).</p></p>
<p id="n4001852"><a href="file987.xhtml#n4001852">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the term “brother” means “fellow believer” or “fellow Christian” (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 2.a), whether male or female. Concerning the familial connotations, see also the note on the first occurrence of this term in v. 15.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
