<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 John 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 John<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God Is Light, So We Must Walk in the Light</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:5</span> Now<sup><a id="n6200112" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200112">12</a></sup> this is the gospel<sup><a id="n6200113" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200113">13</a></sup> message<sup><a id="n6200114" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200114">14</a></sup> we have heard from him<sup><a id="n6200115" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200115">15</a></sup> and announce to you: God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all.<sup><a id="n6200116" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200116">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:6</span> If we say we have fellowship with him and yet keep on walking<sup><a id="n6200117" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200117">17</a></sup> in the darkness, we are lying and not practicing<sup><a id="n6200118" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200118">18</a></sup> the truth. <span class="verse">1:7</span> But if we walk in the light as he himself is in the light, we have fellowship with one another and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses<sup><a id="n6200119" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200119">19</a></sup> us from all sin.<sup><a id="n6200120" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200120">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:8</span> If we say we do not bear the guilt of sin,<sup><a id="n6200121" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200121">21</a></sup> we are deceiving ourselves and the truth is not in us. <span class="verse">1:9</span> But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous,<sup><a id="n6200122" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200122">22</a></sup> forgiving<sup><a id="n6200123" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200123">23</a></sup> us our sins and cleansing<sup><a id="n6200124" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200124">24</a></sup> us from all unrighteousness. <span class="verse">1:10</span> If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar and his word is not in us. <span class="verse">2:1</span> (My little children,<sup><a id="n620021" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n620021">1</a></sup> I am writing these things to you so that you may not sin.<sup><a id="n620022" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n620022">2</a></sup>) But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate<sup><a id="n620023" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n620023">3</a></sup> with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous One,<sup><a id="n620024" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n620024">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:2</span> and he himself is the atoning sacrifice<sup><a id="n620025" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n620025">5</a></sup> for our sins, and not only for our sins but also for the whole world.<sup><a id="n620026" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n620026">6</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Keeping God’s Commandments</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:3</span> Now<sup><a id="n620027" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n620027">7</a></sup> by this we know that we have come to know God:<sup><a id="n620028" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n620028">8</a></sup> if we keep his commandments. <span class="verse">2:4</span> The one who says “I have come to know God”<sup><a id="n620029" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n620029">9</a></sup> and yet does not keep his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in such a person. <span class="verse">2:5</span> But whoever obeys his<sup><a id="n6200210" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200210">10</a></sup> word, truly in this person<sup><a id="n6200211" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200211">11</a></sup> the love of God has been perfected. By this we know that we are in him. <span class="verse">2:6</span> The one who says he resides<sup><a id="n6200212" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200212">12</a></sup> in God<sup><a id="n6200213" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200213">13</a></sup> ought himself to walk<sup><a id="n6200214" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200214">14</a></sup> just as Jesus<sup><a id="n6200215" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200215">15</a></sup> walked. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:7</span> Dear friends, I am not writing a new commandment to you, but an old commandment which you have had from the beginning.<sup><a id="n6200216" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200216">16</a></sup> The old commandment is the word that you have already<sup><a id="n6200217" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200217">17</a></sup> heard. <span class="verse">2:8</span> On the other hand, I am writing a new commandment to you which is true in him<sup><a id="n6200218" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200218">18</a></sup> and in you, because<sup><a id="n6200219" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200219">19</a></sup> the darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining.<sup><a id="n6200220" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200220">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:9</span> The one who says he is in the light but still hates<sup><a id="n6200221" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200221">21</a></sup> his fellow Christian<sup><a id="n6200222" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200222">22</a></sup> is still in the darkness. <span class="verse">2:10</span> The one who loves his fellow Christian<sup><a id="n6200223" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200223">23</a></sup> resides in the light, and there is no cause for stumbling in him.<sup><a id="n6200224" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200224">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:11</span> But the one who hates his fellow Christian<sup><a id="n6200225" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200225">25</a></sup> is in the darkness, walks in the darkness, and does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.<sup><a id="n6200226" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200226">26</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Words of Reassurance</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:12</span> I am writing to you,<sup><a id="n6200227" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200227">27</a></sup> little children, that<sup><a id="n6200228" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200228">28</a></sup> your sins have been forgiven because of his<sup><a id="n6200229" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200229">29</a></sup> name. <span class="verse">2:13</span> I am writing to you, fathers, that<sup><a id="n6200230" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200230">30</a></sup> you have known him who has been from the beginning. I am writing to you, young people, that<sup><a id="n6200231" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200231">31</a></sup> you have conquered the evil one.<sup><a id="n6200232" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200232">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:14</span> I have written to you, children, that<sup><a id="n6200233" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200233">33</a></sup> you have known the Father.<sup><a id="n6200234" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200234">34</a></sup> I have written to you, fathers, that<sup><a id="n6200235" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200235">35</a></sup> you have known him who has been from the beginning. I have written to you, young people, that<sup><a id="n6200236" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200236">36</a></sup> you are strong, and the word of God resides in you, and you have conquered the evil one. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:15</span> Do not love the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him, <span class="verse">2:16</span> because all that is in the world (the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the arrogance produced by material possessions)<sup><a id="n6200237" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200237">37</a></sup> is not from the Father, but is from the world. <span class="verse">2:17</span> And the world is passing away with all its desires, but the person who does the will of God remains<sup><a id="n6200238" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200238">38</a></sup> forever. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Warning About False Teachers</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:18</span> Children, it is the last hour, and just as you heard that the antichrist is coming, so now many antichrists<sup><a id="n6200239" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200239">39</a></sup> have appeared. We know from this that it is the last hour. <span class="verse">2:19</span> They went out from us, but they did not really belong to us, because if they had belonged to us, they would have remained<sup><a id="n6200240" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200240">40</a></sup> with us. But<sup><a id="n6200241" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200241">41</a></sup> they went out from us<sup><a id="n6200242" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200242">42</a></sup> to demonstrate<sup><a id="n6200243" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200243">43</a></sup> that all of them do not belong to us.<sup><a id="n6200244" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200244">44</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:20</span> Nevertheless you have an anointing from the Holy One, and you all know.<sup><a id="n6200245" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200245">45</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:21</span> I have not written to you that<sup><a id="n6200246" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200246">46</a></sup> you do not know the truth, but that<sup><a id="n6200247" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200247">47</a></sup> you do know it, and that<sup><a id="n6200248" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200248">48</a></sup> no lie is of the truth. <span class="verse">2:22</span> Who is the liar but the person who denies that Jesus is the Christ<sup><a id="n6200249" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200249">49</a></sup> ? This one is the antichrist: the person who denies the Father and the Son. <span class="verse">2:23</span> Everyone who denies the Son does not have the Father either. The person who confesses the Son has the Father also.<sup><a id="n6200250" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200250">50</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:24</span> As for you, what you have heard from the beginning must remain<sup><a id="n6200251" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200251">51</a></sup> in you. If what you heard from the beginning remains in you, you also will remain in the Son and in the Father. <span class="verse">2:25</span> Now this<sup><a id="n6200252" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200252">52</a></sup> is the promise that he<sup><a id="n6200253" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200253">53</a></sup> himself made to<sup><a id="n6200254" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200254">54</a></sup> us: eternal life.<sup><a id="n6200255" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200255">55</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:26</span> These things I have written to you about those who are trying to deceive you.<sup><a id="n6200256" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200256">56</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:27</span> Now as for you, the anointing<sup><a id="n6200257" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200257">57</a></sup> that you received from him<sup><a id="n6200258" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200258">58</a></sup> resides<sup><a id="n6200259" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200259">59</a></sup> in you, and you have no need for anyone to teach you. But as his<sup><a id="n6200260" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200260">60</a></sup> anointing teaches you about all things, it is true and is not a lie. Just as<sup><a id="n6200261" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200261">61</a></sup> it<sup><a id="n6200262" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200262">62</a></sup> has taught you, you reside<sup><a id="n6200263" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200263">63</a></sup> in him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Children of God</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:28</span> And now, little children, remain<sup><a id="n6200264" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200264">64</a></sup> in him,<sup><a id="n6200265" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200265">65</a></sup> so that when<sup><a id="n6200266" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200266">66</a></sup> he appears we may have confidence and not shrink away from him in shame when he comes back.<sup><a id="n6200267" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200267">67</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:29</span> If you know that he is righteous, you also know<sup><a id="n6200268" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200268">68</a></sup> that everyone who practices righteousness has been fathered<sup><a id="n6200269" href="file1223_notes.xhtml#n6200269">69</a></sup> by him. </p>

</body>
</html>