<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 John 2</h2>
<p id="n6200112"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) at the beginning of 1:5 takes on a resumptive force, indicated by the phrase “heard from him and announce to you,” which echoes similar phrases in 1:2 and 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n6200113"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “gospel” is not in the Greek text but is supplied to clarify the meaning. See the note on the following word “message.”</p></p>
<p id="n6200114"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word <span class="greek">ἀγγελία</span> (<span class="translit">angelia</span>) occurs only twice in the NT, here and in 1 John 3:11. It is a cognate of <span class="greek">ἐπαγγελία</span> (<span class="translit">epangelia</span>) which occurs much more frequently (some 52 times in the NT) including 1 John 2:25. BDAG 8 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀγγελία</span> 1 offers the meaning “message” which suggests some overlap with the semantic range of <span class="greek">λόγος</span> (<span class="translit">logos</span>), although in the specific context of 1:5 BDAG suggests a reference to the gospel. (The precise “content” of this “good news’ is given by the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> [<span class="translit">hoti</span>] clause which follows in 1:5b.) The word <span class="greek">ἀγγελία</span> here is closely equivalent to <span class="greek">εὐαγγέλιον</span> (<span class="translit">euangelion</span>): (1) it refers to the proclamation of the eyewitness testimony about the life and ministry of Jesus Christ as proclaimed by the author and the rest of the apostolic witnesses (prologue, esp. 1:3-4), and (2) it relates to the salvation of the hearers/readers, since the purpose of this proclamation is to bring them into fellowship with God and with the apostolic witnesses (1:3). Because of this the adjective “gospel” is included in the English translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6200115"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The referent of the pronoun “him” is not entirely clear in the Greek text; it could be either (1) God the Father, or (2) Jesus Christ, both of whom are mentioned at the end of v. 3. A reference to Jesus Christ is more likely because this is the nearest possible antecedent, and because God (the Father) is specifically mentioned in the following clause in v. 5.</p></p>
<p id="n6200116"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The key to understanding the first major section of 1 John, 1:5-3:10, is found in the statement in v. 5: “<i>God is light and in him there is no darkness at all</i>.” The idea of “proclamation”—the apostolic proclamation of eyewitness testimony which the prologue introduces (1:2, 3)—is picked up in 1:5 by the use of the noun <span class="greek">ἀγγελία</span> (<span class="translit">angelia</span>) and the verb <span class="greek">ἀναγγέλλομεν</span> (<span class="translit">anangellomen</span>), cognate to the verb in 1:3. The content of this proclamation is given by the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) clause in 1:5 as the assertion that God is light, so this statement should be understood as the author’s formulation of the apostolic eyewitness testimony introduced in the prologue. (This corresponds to the apostolic preaching elsewhere referred to as <span class="greek">κήρυγμα</span> [<span class="translit">kērugma</span>], although the term the Apostle John uses here is <span class="greek">ἀγγελία</span>.)</p><p><b>sn</b> Following the theme statement in 1:5, <i>God is light and in him there is no darkness at all</i>, the author presents a series of three claims and counterclaims that make up the first unit of 1 John (1:5-2:2). The three claims begin with “if” (1:6, 8, 10) and the three counterclaims begin with “but if” (1:7, 9; 2:1) in the English translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6200117"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The context of this statement in 1:6 indicates clearly that the progressive (continuative or durative) aspect of the present tense must be in view here.</p><p><b>sn</b> The relationship of the phrase <i>keep on walking</i> to <i>if we say</i> is very important for understanding the problem expressed in 1:6. If one should say (<span class="greek">εἴπωμεν</span>, <span class="translit">eipōmen</span>) that he has fellowship with God, and yet continues walking (<span class="greek">περιπατῶμεν</span>, <span class="translit">peripatōmen</span>) in the darkness, then it follows (in the apodosis, the “then” clause) that he is lying and not practicing the truth.</p></p>
<p id="n6200118"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “living according to…”</p></p>
<p id="n6200119"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “purifies.”</p></p>
<p id="n6200120"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 50 s.v. <span class="greek">ἁμαρτία</span> 1 defines this term as “a departure fr. either human or divine standards of uprightness” (see 1 John 5:17 where <span class="greek">ἁμαρτία</span> [<span class="translit">hamartia</span>] and <span class="greek">ἀδικία</span> [<span class="translit">adikia</span>] are related). This word occurs 17 times in 1 John, of which 11 are singular and 6 are plural.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>From all sin</i>. Sometimes a distinction between singular “sin” and plural “sins” has been suggested: Some would see the singular <i>all sin</i> of 1:7 as a reference to sinfulness before conversion and the plural <i>sins</i> of 1:9 as a reference to sins committed after one became a Christian. This amounts to making 1:7 refer to initial justification and 1:9 to sanctification. But the phrase <i>all sin</i> in 1:7 is so comprehensive that it can hardly be limited to preconversion sins, and the emphasis on “walking” in 1:7 strongly suggests that the Christian life is in view (not one’s life before conversion). In 1 John 1:8 sin appears as a condition or characteristic quality, which in 1:10 is regarded as universal. Apart from forgiveness in Christ it results in alienation from God (2:15) and spiritual death (3:14). But according to 1 John 1:7, cleansing from sin is possible by the blood (representing the sacrificial death) of Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n6200121"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “say we do not have sin.” The use of <span class="greek">ἔχω</span> + <span class="greek">ἁμαρτία</span> (<span class="translit">echō</span> + <span class="translit">hamartia</span>) is an expression limited to John and 1 John in the NT. On the analogy with other constructions where <span class="greek">ἔχω</span> governs an abstract noun (e.g., 1 John 1:3, 6, 7; 2:28; 3:3, 15, 21; 4:16, 17; 5:12-13), it indicates that a <i>state</i> is involved, which in the case of <span class="greek">ἁμαρτία</span> would refer to <i>a state of sin</i>. The four times the expression <span class="greek">ἔχω</span> + <span class="greek">ἁμαρτία</span> occurs in the Gospel of John (9:41; 15:22, 24; 19:11) all refer to situations where a wrong action has been committed or a wrong attitude has already existed, resulting in a state of sin, and then something else happens which further emphasizes the evil of that action or attitude. Here in 1 John 1:8 the sense is the same. The author is addressing people who have sinned (resulting in a state of sin), warning them that they cannot claim to be free from the guilt of that sin. The context of 1 John does not imply libertinism (where sins are flaunted as a way of demonstrating one’s “liberty”) on the part of the opponents, since the author makes no explicit charges of immoral behavior against his opponents. The worst the author explicitly says is that they have failed to love the brethren (1 John 3:17). It seems more likely that the opponents were saying that things a believer did after conversion were not significant enough to be “sins” that could challenge one’s intimate relationship with God (a relationship the author denies that the opponents have to begin with).</p></p>
<p id="n6200122"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “just.”</p></p>
<p id="n6200123"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) followed by the subjunctive is here equivalent to the infinitive of result, an “ecbatic” or consecutive use of <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> according to BDAG 477 s.v. 3 where 1 John 1:9 is listed as a specific example. The translation with participles (“forgiving,…cleansing”) conveys this idea of result.</p></p>
<p id="n6200124"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “purifying.”</p></p>
<p id="n620021"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n620021">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>My little children</i>. The direct address by the author to his readers at the beginning of 2:1 marks a break in the pattern of the opponents’ claims (indicated by the phrase <i>if we say</i> followed by a negative statement in the apodosis, the “then” clause) and the author’s counterclaims (represented by <i>if</i> with a positive statement in the apodosis) made so far in 1:6-10. The seriousness of this last claim (in 1:10) causes the author to interrupt himself to address the readers as his faithful children and to explain to them that while he wants them not to sin, they may be assured that if they do, they can look to Jesus Christ, as their advocate with the Father, to intercede for them. After this, the last of the author’s three counter-claims in 1:5-2:2 is found in the <i>if</i> clause in 2:1b.</p></p>
<p id="n620022"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n620022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is some dispute over the significance of the aorist tense of <span class="greek">ἁμάρτητε</span> (<span class="translit">hamartēte</span>): (1) F. Stagg (“Orthodoxy and Orthopraxy in the Johannine Epistles,” <i>RevExp</i> 67 [1970]:423-32, esp. 428) holds that the aorist is nondescriptive, saying nothing about the nature of the action itself, but only that the action has happened. This is indeed the normal aspectual value of the aorist tense in general, but there is some disagreement over whether with this particular verb there are more specific nuances of meaning. (2) M. Zerwick (<i>Biblical Greek</i> §251) and N. Turner (MHT 3:72) agree that the <i>present</i> tense of <span class="greek">ἁμαρτάνω</span> (<span class="translit">hamartanō</span>) means “to be in a state of sin” (i.e., a sinner) while the <i>aorist</i> refers to specific acts of sin. Without attempting to sort out this particular dispute, it should be noted that certain verbs do have different nuances of meaning in different tenses, nuances which do not derive solely from the aspectual value of the tense per se, but from a combination of semantic factors which vary from word to word.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>So that you may not sin</i>. It is clear the author is <i>not</i> simply exhorting the readers not to be habitual or repetitive sinners, as if to imply that occasional acts of sin would be acceptable. The purpose of the author here is that the readers not sin <i>at all</i>, just as Jesus told the man he healed in John 5:14 “Don’t sin any more.”</p></p>
<p id="n620023"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n620023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> The description of the Holy Spirit as “Paraclete” is unique to the Gospel of John (14:16, 26; 15:26; and 16:7). Here, in the only other use of the word in the NT, it is Jesus, not the Spirit, who is described as <span class="greek">παράκλητος</span> (<span class="translit">paraklētos</span>). The reader should have been prepared for this interchangeability of terminology, however, by John 14:16, where Jesus told the disciples that he would ask the Father to send them ‘another’ paraclete (<span class="greek">ἄλλος</span>, <span class="translit">allos</span>, “another of the same kind”). This implies that <i>Jesus himself had been a paraclete</i> in his earthly ministry to the disciples. This does not answer all the questions about the meaning of the word here, though, since it is not Jesus’ role as an advocate during his earthly ministry which is in view, but his role as an advocate in heaven before the Father. The context suggests intercession in the sense of legal advocacy, as stress is placed upon the righteousness of Jesus (<span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦν Χριστὸν δίκαιον</span>, <span class="translit">Iēsoun Christon dikaion</span>). The concept of Jesus’ intercession on behalf of believers does occur elsewhere in the NT, notably in Rom 8:34 and Heb 7:25. Something similar is taking place here, and is the best explanation of 1 John 2:1. An English translation like “advocate” or “intercessor” conveys this.</p></p>
<p id="n620024"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n620024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Jesus Christ the righteous.”</p></p>
<p id="n620025"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n620025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> A suitable English translation for this word (<span class="greek">ἱλασμός</span>, <span class="translit">hilasmos</span>) is a difficult and even controversial problem. “Expiation,” “propitiation,” and “atonement” have all been suggested. L. Morris, in a study that has become central to discussions of this topic (<i>The Apostolic Preaching of the Cross</i>, 140), sees as an integral part of the meaning of the word (as in the other words in the <span class="greek">ἱλάσκομαι</span> [<span class="translit">hilaskomai</span>] group) the idea <i>of turning away the divine wrath</i>, suggesting that “propitiation” is the closest English equivalent. It is certainly possible to see an averting of divine wrath in this context, where the sins of believers are in view and Jesus is said to be acting as Advocate on behalf of believers. R. E. Brown’s point (<i>Epistles of John</i> [AB], 220-21), that it is essentially cleansing from sin which is in view here and in the other use of the word in 4:10, is well taken, but the two connotations (averting wrath and cleansing) are not mutually exclusive and it is unlikely that the propitiatory aspect of Jesus’ work should be ruled out entirely in the usage in 2:2. Nevertheless, the English word “propitiation” is too technical to communicate to many modern readers, and a term like “atoning sacrifice” (given by Webster’s <i>New International Dictionary</i> as a definition of “propitiation”) is more appropriate here. Another term, “satisfaction,” might also convey the idea, but “satisfaction” in Roman Catholic theology is a technical term for the performance of the penance imposed by the priest on a penitent.</p><p><b>sn</b> The Greek word (<span class="greek">ἱλασμός</span>, <span class="translit">hilasmos</span>) behind the phrase <i>atoning sacrifice</i> conveys both the idea of “turning aside divine wrath” and the idea of “cleansing from sin.”</p></p>
<p id="n620026"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n620026">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Many translations supply an understood repetition of the word “sins” here, thus: “but also for the sins of the whole world.”</p></p>
<p id="n620027"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n620027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation of <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) at the beginning of 2:3 is important for understanding the argument, because a similar <span class="greek">καί</span> occurs at the beginning of 1:5. The use here is not just a simple continuative or connective use, but has more of a resumptive force, pointing back to the previous use in 1:5.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Now</i>. The author, after discussing three claims of the opponents in 1:6, 8, and 10 and putting forward three counterclaims of his own in 1:7; 1:9, and 2:1, now returns to the theme of “God as light” introduced in 1:5. The author will now discuss how a Christian may have assurance that he or she has come to know the God who is light, again by contrast with the opponents who make the same profession of knowing God, but lack the reality of such knowledge, as their behavior makes clear.</p></p>
<p id="n620028"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n620028">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “know him.” (1) Many take the third person pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτον</span> (<span class="translit">auton</span>) to refer to Jesus Christ, since he is mentioned in 2:1 and the pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτός</span> (<span class="translit">autos</span>) at the beginning of 2:2 clearly refers to him. But (2) it is more likely that God is the referent here, since (a) the assurance the author is discussing here is assurance that one has come to know God (all the claims of the opponents in 1:5-2:11 concern knowing and having fellowship with the God who is light); (b) when Jesus Christ is explicitly mentioned as an example to follow in 1 John 2:6, the pronoun <span class="greek">ἐκεῖνος</span> (<span class="translit">ekeinos</span>) is used to distinguish this from previous references with <span class="greek">αὐτός</span>; (c) the <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) which begins 2:3 is parallel to the <span class="greek">καί</span> which begins 1:5, suggesting that the author is now returning to the discussion of God who is light, a theme introduced in 1:5. The author will now discuss how a Christian may have assurance that he or she has come to know the God who is light.</p></p>
<p id="n620029"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n620029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “know him.” See the note on the phrase “know God” in 1 John 2:3 for explanation.</p></p>
<p id="n6200210"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The referent of this pronoun is probably to be understood as God, since God is the nearest previous antecedent.</p></p>
<p id="n6200211"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in him.”</p></p>
<p id="n6200212"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek verb <span class="greek">μένω</span> (<span class="translit">menō</span>) is commonly translated into contemporary English as “remain” or “abide,” but both of these translations have some problems: (1) “Abide” has become in some circles almost a “technical term” for some sort of special intimate fellowship or close relationship between the Christian and God, so that one may speak of Christians who are “abiding” and Christians who are not. It is accurate to say the word indicates a close, intimate (and permanent) relationship between the believer and God. However, it is very important to note that for the author of the Gospel of John and the Johannine Epistles <i>every</i> genuine Christian has this type of relationship with God, and the person who does not have this type of relationship (cf. 2 John 9) is not a believer at all (in spite of what he or she may claim). (2) On the other hand, to translate <span class="greek">μένω</span> as “remain” removes some of these problems, but creates others: In certain contexts, such a translation can give the impression that those who currently “remain” in this relationship with God can at some point choose not to “remain”, that is, to abandon their faith and return to an unsaved condition. While one may easily think in terms of the author’s opponents in 1 John as not “remaining,” the author makes it inescapably clear in 2:19 that these people, in spite of their claims to know God and be in fellowship with God, <i>never</i> really were genuine believers. (3) In an attempt to avoid both these misconceptions, this translation renders <span class="greek">μένω</span> as “reside” <i>except</i> in cases where the context indicates that “remain” is a more accurate nuance, that is, in contexts where a specific change of status or movement from one position to another is in view.</p><p><b>sn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">μένω</span> (<span class="translit">menō</span>) translated <i>resides</i> indicates a close, intimate (and permanent) relationship between the believer and God. It is very important to note that for the author of the Gospel of John and the Johannine Epistles <i>every</i> genuine Christian has this type of relationship with God, and the person who does not have this type of relationship (cf. 2 John 9) is not a believer at all (in spite of what he or she may claim).</p></p>
<p id="n6200213"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in him.” Context indicates a reference to God since a different pronoun, <span class="greek">ἐκεινος</span> (<span class="translit">ekeinos</span>), is used later in the same verse to indicate a reference to Jesus. See the note on “Jesus” later in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n6200214"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, ought to behave in the same way Jesus did. “Walking” is a common NT idiom for one’s behavior or conduct. </p></p>
<p id="n6200215"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that one.” Context indicates a reference to Jesus here. It is clear that <span class="greek">ἐκεῖνος</span> (<span class="translit">ekeinos</span>) here does not refer to the same person as <span class="greek">αὐτῷ</span> (<span class="translit">autō</span>) in 2:6a. The switch to <span class="greek">ἐκεῖνος</span> indicates a change in the referent, and a reference to Jesus Christ is confirmed by the verb <span class="greek">περιεπάτησεν</span> (<span class="translit">periepatēsen</span>), an activity which can only describe Jesus’ earthly life and ministry, the significance of which is one of the points of contention the author has with the opponents. In fact, <span class="greek">ἐκεῖνος</span> occurs 6 times in 1 John (2:6; 3:3, 5, 7, 16; and 4:17), and each one refers to Jesus Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n6200216"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200216">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> See John 13:34-35.</p></p>
<p id="n6200217"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Already” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6200218"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> “In him” probably refers to Jesus Christ since the last third person pronoun in 2:6 referred to Jesus Christ and there is no indication in the context of a change in referent.</p></p>
<p id="n6200219"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The clause beginning with <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) is often taken as (1) epexegetical or (2) appositional to the commandment (<span class="greek">ἐντολήν</span>, <span class="translit">entolēn</span>) giving a further explanation or clarification of it. But the statement following the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> is about light and darkness, and it is difficult to see how this has anything to do with the commandment, especially as the commandment is related to the “new commandment” of John 13:34 for believers to love one another. It is far more likely that (3) the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> clause should be understood as causal, but this still does not answer the question of whether it offers the reason for writing the “new commandment” itself or the reason for the relative clause (“that is true in him and in you”). It probably gives the reason for the writing of the commandment, although R. E. Brown (<i>Epistles of John</i> [AB], 268) thinks it refers to both.</p></p>
<p id="n6200220"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200220">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> The reference to <i>the darkness…passing away and the true light…already shining</i> is an allusion to John 1:5, 9, and 8:12. Because the author sees the victory of <i>light</i> over <i>darkness</i> as something already begun, he is writing Jesus’ commandment to love one another to the readers as a reminder to (1) hold fast to what they have already heard (see 1 John 2:7) and (2) not be influenced by the teaching of the opponents.</p></p>
<p id="n6200221"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one saying he is in the light and hating his brother.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” because of the contrast present in the two clauses.</p></p>
<p id="n6200222"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his brother.” Here the term “brother” means “fellow believer” or “fellow Christian” (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 2.a). In the repeated uses of this form of address throughout the letter, it is important to remember that sometimes it refers (1) to genuine Christians (those who have remained faithful to the apostolic eyewitness testimony about who Jesus is, as outlined in the Prologue to the letter, 1:1-4; examples of this usage are 2:10; 3:14, 16), but often it refers (2) to the secessionist opponents whose views the author rejects (examples are found here at 2:9, as well as 2:11; 3:10; 3:15; 3:17; 4:20). Of course, to be technically accurate, in the latter case the reference is really to a “fellow member of the community”; the use of the term “fellow Christian” in the translation no more implies that such an individual is genuinely saved than the literal term “brother” which the author uses for such people. But a translation like “fellow member of the community” or “fellow member of the congregation” is extremely awkward and simply cannot be employed consistently throughout.</p></p>
<p id="n6200223"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> See note on the term “fellow Christian” in 2:9.</p></p>
<p id="n6200224"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The third person pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτῷ</span> (<span class="translit">autō</span>) could refer either (1) to the person who loves his brother or (2) to the light itself which has no cause for stumbling “in it.” The following verse (2:11) views darkness as operative within a person, and the analogy with Ps 119:165, which says that the person who loves God’s law does not stumble, expresses a similar concept in relation to an individual. This evidence suggests that the person is the referent here.</p></p>
<p id="n6200225"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200225">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The one who hates his fellow Christian</i>. The author’s paradigm for the opponents portrays them as those who show hatred for fellow Christians (<i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but not referring to one’s physical siblings). This charge will be much more fully developed in chap. 3, where the author will compare the opponents to Cain (who is the model for one who hates a brother, since he ultimately murdered his own brother). In 1 John 3:17 the specific charge against the opponents will be failing to give material aid to a brother in need.</p></p>
<p id="n6200226"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200226">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>1 John 2:3-11</i>. The section 2:3-11 contains three claims to intimate knowledge of God, each introduced by the phrase <i>the one who says</i> (participles in the Greek text) in 2:4, 6, and 9. As with the three claims beginning with “if” in the previous section (1:6, 8, 10), these indirectly reflect the claims of the opponents. Each claim is followed by the author’s evaluation and its implications.</p></p>
<p id="n6200227"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200227">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I am writing to you</i>. The author appears to have been concerned that some of his readers, at least, would accept the claims of the opponents as voiced in 1:6, 8, and 10. The counterclaims the author has made in 1:7, 9, and 2:1 seem intended to strengthen the readers and reassure them (among other things) that their sins are forgiven. Further assurances of their position here is in keeping with such a theme, and indeed, the topic of reassurance runs throughout the entire letter (see the purpose statement in 5:13). Finally, in such a context the warning which follows in 2:15-17 is not out of place because the author is dealing with a community that is discouraged by the controversy which has arisen within it and that is in need of exhortation.</p></p>
<p id="n6200228"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) that follows all six occurrences of <span class="greek">γράφω</span>/<span class="greek">ἔγραψα</span> (<span class="translit">graphō</span>/<span class="translit">egrapsa</span>) in 2:12-14 can be understood as introducing either (1) a causal clause or (2) a content clause (if content, it could be said to introduce a direct object clause or an indirect discourse clause). Many interpreters have favored a causal translation, so that in each of the six cases what follows the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> gives the reason why the author is writing to the recipients. Usage in similar constructions is not decisive because only one other instance of <span class="greek">γράφω</span> followed by <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> occurs in 1 John (2:21), and that context is just as ambiguous as this one. On other occasions <span class="greek">γράφω</span> does tend to be followed by a noun or pronoun functioning as direct object. This might argue for the content usage here, but it could also be argued that the direct object in the six instances in these verses is understood, namely, the content of the entire letter itself. Thus the following <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> clause could still be causal. Grammatical considerations aside, these uses of <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> are more likely introducing content clauses here rather than causal clauses because such a meaning better fits the context. If the uses of <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> are understood as causal, it is difficult to see why the author immediately gives a warning in the section that follows about loving the world. The confidence he has expressed in his readers (if the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> clauses are understood as causal) would appear to be ill-founded if he is so concerned about their relationship to the world as 2:15-17 seems to indicate. On the other hand, understanding the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> clauses as content clauses fits very well the context of reassurance which runs throughout the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n6200229"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> “His” probably refers to Jesus Christ. Note the last reference was to Jesus in 2:8 and before that in 2:6; also the mention of sins being forgiven suggests Jesus’ work on the cross.</p></p>
<p id="n6200230"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on “that” in v. 12.</p></p>
<p id="n6200231"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on “that” in v. 12.</p></p>
<p id="n6200232"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200232">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>the evil one</i> is used in John 17:15 as a reference to Satan. Satan is also the referent here and in the four other occurrences in 1 John (2:14; 3:12; 5:18, 19).</p></p>
<p id="n6200233"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on “that” in v. 12.</p></p>
<p id="n6200234"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200234">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> The versification of vv. 13 and 14 (so also NAB, NRSV, NLT) follows that of the NA<sup>27/28</sup> and UBS<sup>4/5</sup> editions of the Greek text. Some English translations, however, break the verses between the sentence addressed to children and the sentence addressed to fathers (KJV, NKJV, NASB, NIV). The same material has been translated in each case; the only difference is the versification of that material.</p></p>
<p id="n6200235"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on “that” in v. 12.</p></p>
<p id="n6200236"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on “that” in v. 12.</p></p>
<p id="n6200237"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive <span class="greek">βίου</span> (<span class="translit">biou</span>) is difficult to translate: (1) Many understand it as objective, so that <span class="greek">βίος</span> (<span class="translit">bios</span>, “material life”) becomes the <i>object</i> of one’s <span class="greek">ἀλαζονεία</span> (<span class="translit">alazoneia</span>; “pride” or “boastfulness”). Various interpretations along these lines refer to boasting about one’s wealth, showing off one’s possessions, boasting of one’s social status or lifestyle. (2) It is also possible to understand the genitive as subjective, however, in which case the <span class="greek">βίος</span> itself <i>produces</i> the <span class="greek">ἀλαζονεία</span>. In this case, the material security of one’s life and possessions produces a boastful overconfidence. This understanding better fits the context here: The focus is on people who operate purely on a human level and have no spiritual dimension to their existence. This is the person who loves the world, whose affections are all centered on the world, who has no love for God or spiritual things (“the love of the Father is not in him,” 2:15).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The arrogance produced by material possessions</i>. The person who thinks he has enough wealth and property to protect himself and insure his security has no need for God (or anything outside himself).</p></p>
<p id="n6200238"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> See note on the translation of the Greek verb <span class="greek">μένω</span> (<span class="translit">menō</span>) in 2:6. The translation “remain” is used for <span class="greek">μένω</span> (<span class="translit">menō</span>) here because the context contrasts the transience of the world and its desires with the permanence of the person who does God’s will.</p></p>
<p id="n6200239"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200239">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Antichrists</i> are John’s description for the opponents and their false teaching, which is at variance with the apostolic eyewitness testimony about who Jesus is (cf. 1:1-4). The identity of these opponents has been variously debated by scholars, with some contending (1) that these false teachers originally belonged to the group of apostolic leaders, but departed from it (“went out from us,” v. 19). It is much more likely (2) that they arose from within the Christian communities to which John is writing, however, and with which he identifies himself. This identification can be seen in the interchange of the pronouns “we” and “you” between 1:10 and 2:1, for example, where “we” does not refer only to John and the other apostles, but is inclusive, referring to both himself and the Christians he is writing to (2:1, “you”).</p></p>
<p id="n6200240"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200240">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> See note on the translation of the Greek verb <span class="greek">μένω</span> (<span class="translit">menō</span>) in 2:6. Here <span class="greek">μένω</span> has been translated as “remained” since it is clear that a change of status or position is involved. The opponents departed from the author’s congregation(s) and showed by this departure that they never really belonged. Had they really belonged, they would have stayed (“remained”).</p></p>
<p id="n6200241"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6200242"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “they went out from us” is not repeated a second time in the Greek text, but constitutes an ellipsis. For clarity it is necessary to repeat it in the English translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6200243"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in order that it may be demonstrated.” The passive infinitive has been translated as active and the purpose clause translated by an infinitive in keeping with contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6200244"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200244">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>All of them do not belong to us</i>. The opponents chose to depart rather than remain in fellowship with the community to which the author writes and with which he associates himself. This demonstrates conclusively to the author that they never really belonged to that community at all (in spite of what they were claiming). 1 John 2:19 indicates that the departure was apparently the opponents’ own decision rather than being thrown out or excommunicated. But for John, if they had been genuine believers, they would have remained in fellowship. Now they have gone out into the world, where they belong (compare 1 John 4:5).</p></p>
<p id="n6200245"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200245">45</a> <p><b>tc</b> A two-letter difference in Greek creates two quite diverse readings: <span class="greek">πάντες</span> (<span class="translit">pantes</span>, nominative plural in “you <i>all</i> know”) is read by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1852 sy sa; A C 049 5 33 81 436 1175 1243 1611 1735 1739 1881 2344 2492 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt bo have the accusative <span class="greek">πάντα</span> (<span class="translit">panta</span>, “you know <i>all things</i>”). The external evidence favors the nominative reading, but it is not overwhelming. The internal evidence is more compelling in favor of the nominative. Scribes would naturally tend to give the transitive verb a direct object, especially because of the parallel in the first half of the verse. And intrinsically, the argument seems to be in balance with v. 19: The “all” who have gone out and are not “in the know” with the “all” who have an anointing and know that they are true believers. Further, as R. E. Brown points out, “the fact of their knowledge (<i>pantes</i>), not the extent of its object (<i>panta</i>), seems best to fit the reassurance” (<i>Epistles of John</i> [AB], 349). Brown further points out the connection with the new covenant in Jer 31 with this section of 1 John, esp. Jer 31:34—“they all [<i>pantes</i>] shall know me.” Since 1 John alludes to Jer 31, without directly quoting it, this is all the more reason to see the nominative as autographic: Allusions are often overlooked by scribes (transcriptional evidence), but support the intrinsic evidence. Thus, the evidence is solidly, though not overwhelmingly, behind the nominative reading.</p><p><b>sn</b> The statement <i>you all know</i> probably constitutes an indirect allusion to the provisions of the new covenant mentioned in Jer 31 (see especially Jer 31:34). See also R. E. Brown, <i>The Epistles of John</i> [AB], 349.</p></p>
<p id="n6200246"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> The interpretation of the three <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> clauses in v. 21 is very difficult: (1) All three instances of <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) may be causal (so NASB, NIV, NEB). (2) The first two may be causal while the third indicates content (declarative or recitative <span class="greek">ὅτι</span>, so KJV, RSV, TEV, NRSV). (3) However, it is best to take all three instances as indicating content because this allows all three to be subordinate to the verb <span class="greek">ἔγραψα</span> (<span class="translit">egrapsa</span>) as compound direct objects. The author writes to reassure his readers (a) that they do indeed know the truth (first two uses of <span class="greek">ὅτι</span>) and (b) that no lie is of the truth (third use).</p></p>
<p id="n6200247"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200247">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the first occurrence of “that” in v. 21.</p></p>
<p id="n6200248"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the first occurrence of “that” in v. 21.</p></p>
<p id="n6200249"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200249">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah”</p></p>
<p id="n6200250"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200250">50</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Byzantine text, with a handful of other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (81 642 1175 2492 <span class="apparatus">M</span>), lacks the last eight words of this verse, “The person who confesses the Son has the Father also” (<span class="greek">ὁ ὁμολογῶν τὸν υἱὸν καὶ τὸν πατέρα ἔχει</span>, <span class="translit">ho homologōn ton huion kai ton patera echei</span>). Although shorter readings are often preferred (since scribes would tend to add material rather than delete it), if an unintentional error is likely, shorter readings are generally considered secondary. This is a classic example of such an unintentional omission: The <span class="greek">τὸν πατέρα ἔχει</span> of the preceding clause occasioned the haplography, with the scribe’s eye skipping from one <span class="greek">τὸν πατέρα ἔχει</span> to the other. </p></p>
<p id="n6200251"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word translated “remain” may also be translated “reside” (3 times in 2:24). See also the notes on the translation of the Greek verb <span class="greek">μένω</span> (<span class="translit">menō</span>) in 2:6 and in 2:19. Here the word can really have both nuances of “residing” and “remaining” and it is impossible for the English reader to catch both nuances if the translation provides only one. This occurs three times in 2:24.</p></p>
<p id="n6200252"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200252">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> It is difficult to know whether the phrase <span class="greek">καὶ αὕτη ἐστιν</span> (<span class="translit">kai hautē estin</span>) refers (1) to the preceding or (2) to the following material, or (3) to both. The same phrase occurs at the beginning of 1:5, where it serves as a transitional link between the prologue (1:1-4) and the first major section of the letter (1:5-3:10). It is probably best to see the phrase here as transitional as well; thus <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated “now” rather than “and.” The accusative phrase at the end of v. 25, <span class="greek">τὴν ζωὴν τὴν αἰώνιον</span> (<span class="translit">tēn zōēn tēn aiōnion</span>), stands in apposition to the relative pronoun <span class="greek">ἥν</span> (<span class="translit">hēn</span>), whose antecedent is <span class="greek">ἡ ἐπαγγελία</span> (<span class="translit">hē epangelia</span>; see BDF §295). Thus the “promise” consists of “eternal life.”</p></p>
<p id="n6200253"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200253">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> The pronoun could refer to God or Jesus Christ, but a reference to Jesus Christ is more likely here.</p></p>
<p id="n6200254"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200254">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he himself promised.” The repetition of the cognate verb “promised” after the noun “promise” is redundant in English. </p></p>
<p id="n6200255"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200255">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> The promise consists of <i>eternal life</i>, but it is also related to the concept of “remaining” in 2:24. The person who “remains in the Son and in the Father” thus has this promise of eternal life from Jesus himself. Consistent with this, 1 John 5:12 implies that the believer has this eternal life <i>now</i>, not just in the future, and this in turn agrees with John 5:24.</p></p>
<p id="n6200256"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200256">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>those who are trying to deceive you</i> in 1 John 2:26 is a clear reference to the secessionist opponents mentioned earlier in 1 John 2:19, who are attempting to <i>deceive</i> the people the author is writing to.</p></p>
<p id="n6200257"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200257">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The anointing</i>. The “anointing” (<span class="greek">χρῖσμα</span>, <span class="translit">chrisma</span>) which believers have received refers to the indwelling Holy Spirit which has been given to them at their conversion.</p></p>
<p id="n6200258"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200258">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> The pronoun could refer to God or Jesus Christ, but a reference to Jesus Christ is more likely here.</p></p>
<p id="n6200259"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200259">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> This use of <span class="greek">μένω</span> (<span class="translit">menō</span>) has been translated “reside” both times in 2:27 because it refers to the current status of believers.</p></p>
<p id="n6200260"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200260">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> The pronoun could refer (1) to God or (2) to Jesus Christ, but a reference to Jesus Christ is more likely here.</p></p>
<p id="n6200261"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200261">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and is not a lie, and just as.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6200262"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200262">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “he.”</p></p>
<p id="n6200263"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200263">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb may be read as either (1) indicative or (2) imperative mood. The same verb is found in the following verse, 2:28, but the address to the readers there seems clearly to indicate an imperative. On analogy some have called for an imperative here, but others have seen this as suggesting an indicative here, so that the author is not repeating himself. An indicative is slightly more likely here. Up to this point the thrust of the author has been reassurance rather than exhortation, and an indicative here (“…you reside in him”) balances the indicative in the first part of 2:27 (“the anointing which you received from him resides in you…”). With the following verse the author switches from reassurance (the readers at the time he is writing still ‘remain’; they have not yet adopted the teaching of the opponents) to exhortation (he is writing so that they will ‘remain’ and not succumb to the deception of the opponents).</p></p>
<p id="n6200264"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200264">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Again, as at the end of 2:27, the verb <span class="greek">μένετε</span> (<span class="translit">menete</span>) may be read as either (1) indicative or (2) imperative mood. At the end of 2:27 the translation opted for an indicative because the author had been attempting to reassure his readers that they did indeed possess eternal life, and also because an indicative at the end of 2:27 balances the indicative reference to the “anointing” residing in the readers at the beginning of the verse. With the return in 2:28 to the eschatological note introduced in 2:18, however, it appears that the author switches from reassurance to exhortation. At the time he is writing them, the readers do still “remain” since they have not yet adopted the heretical teaching of the opponents. But now the author wants to forestall the possibility that they might do so at some point, and so he begins this section with an exhortation to the readers to “reside/remain” in Christ. This suggests that <span class="greek">μένετε</span> in the present verse should be read as imperative rather than indicative, a view made even more probable by the following <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clause which states the purpose for the exhortation: in order that at the parousia (second advent) when Jesus Christ is revealed, the readers may have confidence and not shrink back from him in shame when he appears.</p></p>
<p id="n6200265"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200265">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> A reference to Jesus Christ is more likely here. Note the mention of the second coming (second advent) at the end of this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n6200266"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200266">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> In this context <span class="greek">ἐάν</span> (<span class="translit">ean</span>) does not indicate uncertainty about <i>whether</i> or not Christ will return, but rather uncertainty about the exact time <i>when</i> the event will take place. In the Koine period <span class="greek">ἐάν</span> could mean “when” or “whenever” and was virtually the equivalent of <span class="greek">ὅταν</span> (<span class="translit">hotan</span>; see BDAG 268 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐάν</span> 2). It has this meaning in John 12:32 and 14:3.</p></p>
<p id="n6200267"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200267">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at his coming.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Have confidence…shrink away from him in shame when he comes back</i>. Once again in the antithetical framework of Johannine thought (that is, the author’s tendency to think in terms of polar opposites), there are only two alternatives, just as there are only two alternatives in John 3:18-21, a key section for the understanding of the present passage in 1 John. Anyone who does not ‘remain’ demonstrates (just as the opponents demonstrated by their departure from the community in 2:19) that whatever profession he has made is false and he is not truly a believer.</p></p>
<p id="n6200268"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200268">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> The mood of <span class="greek">γινώσκετε</span> (<span class="translit">ginōskete</span>) may be understood as (1) indicative or (2) imperative. It is better to understand the verb here as indicative, because in 1 John “knowledge” is something one <i>has</i> as a result of being a believer (2:3, 5, 20, 21; 3:16, 19, 24; 4:2, 13; 5:2) rather than something one has to be exhorted about. The change in verbs from <span class="greek">οἶδα</span> (<span class="translit">oida</span>) to <span class="greek">γινώσκω</span> (<span class="translit">ginōskō</span>) is another example of Johannine stylistic variation.</p></p>
<p id="n6200269"><a href="file1223.xhtml#n6200269">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">γεννάω</span> (<span class="translit">gennaō</span>) presents a translation problem: (1) should the passive be translated archaically “be begotten” (the action of the male parent; see BDAG 193 s.v. 1.a) or (2) should it be translated “be born” (as from a female parent; see BDAG 194 s.v. 2)? A number of modern translations (RSV, NASB, NIV) have opted for the latter, but (3) the imagery expressed in 1 John 3:9 clearly refers to the action of the male parent in procreating a child, as does 5:1 (“everyone who loves the father loves the child fathered by him”), and so a word reflecting the action of the male parent is called for here. The contemporary expression “fathered by” captures this idea.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
