<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n500041"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n500041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:12.</p></p>
<p id="n500042"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n500042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faithful fellow worker.” This is more likely a descriptive noun, although some scholars interpret the word <span class="greek">σύζυγος</span> (<span class="translit">suzugos</span>) here as a proper name (“Syzygos”), L&amp;N 42.45.</p></p>
<p id="n500043"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n500043">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the gospel,” a metonymy in which the gospel itself is substituted for the ministry of making the gospel known.</p></p>
<p id="n500044"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n500044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let your gentleness be seen by all.” The passive voice construction has been converted to active voice in the translation for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n500045"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n500045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will guard the hearts of you and the minds of you.” To improve the English style, the second occurrence of <span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">humōn</span>, “of you”) has not been translated, since it is somewhat redundant in English.</p></p>
<p id="n500046"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n500046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:12.</p></p>
<p id="n500047"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n500047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for you were even concerned, but you lacked opportunity.”</p></p>
<p id="n500048"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n500048">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “of contentment” are not in the Greek text, but are implied by Paul’s remarks at the end of v. 11.</p></p>
<p id="n500049"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n500049">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word translated “all things” is in emphatic position at the beginning of the Greek sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n5000410"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n5000410">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although some excellent witnesses lack explicit reference to the one strengthening Paul (so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B D* I 33 1739 lat co Cl), the majority of witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D<sup>2</sup> [F G] <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 1175 1241 1505 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> sy Hier) add <span class="greek">Χριστῷ</span> (<span class="translit">Christō</span>) here (thus, “through Christ who strengthens me”). But this kind of reading is patently secondary, and is a predictable variant. Further, the shorter reading is much harder, for it leaves the agent unspecified.</p></p>
<p id="n5000412"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n5000412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “several times”; <i>Grk</i>, “both once and twice.” The literal expression “once and twice” is frequently used as a Greek idiom referring to an indefinite low number, but more than once (“several times”); see L&amp;N 60.70.</p></p>
<p id="n5000413"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n5000413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Not that I am seeking the gift.” The phrase “I do not say this…” has been supplied in the translation to complete the thought for the modern reader.</p></p>
<p id="n5000414"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n5000414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “The brothers and sisters” (so TEV, TNIV; cf. NRSV “The friends”; CEV “The Lord’s followers”) If “brothers” refers to Paul’s traveling companions, it is probably that only men are in view (cf. NAB, NLT). Since v. 22 mentions “all the saints,” which presumably includes everyone, it is more probable here that only Paul’s traveling companions are in view.</p></p>
<p id="n5000415"><a href="file1157.xhtml#n5000415">15</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including several significant ones (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1241 1505 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy bo), have <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”) at the end of this letter, while an impressive combination of Alexandrian and Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B F G 075 6 075 1739* 1881 sa Ambst) lack the valedictory particle. Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Thus, on internal grounds, with sufficient support from external evidence, the preferred reading is the omission of <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>.</p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
