<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n470131"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n470131">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “visit” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n470132"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n470132">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “By the mouth.”</p></p>
<p id="n470133"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n470133">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 19:15 (also quoted in Matt 18:16; 1 Tim 5:19).</p></p>
<p id="n470134"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n470134">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “anyone” is not in the Greek text but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n470135"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n470135">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n470136"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n470136">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “unless indeed you are disqualified.”</p></p>
<p id="n470137"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n470137">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “that we are not disqualified.”</p></p>
<p id="n470138"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n470138">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “that we may appear to be approved.”</p></p>
<p id="n470139"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n470139">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “what is good.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701310"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n4701310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “even if we appear disapproved.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701311"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n4701311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “fully equipped.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701312"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n4701312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “when I am present,” but in the context of Paul’s third (upcoming) visit to Corinth, this is better translated as “when I arrive.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701313"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n4701313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “with you” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4701314"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n4701314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:8.</p></p>
<p id="n4701315"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n4701315">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> The versification of vv. 12 and 13 in the NET (so also NRSV, NLT) is according to the versification in the NA<sup>28</sup> and UBS<sup>5</sup> editions of the Greek text. Some translations, however, break the material up into three verses, i.e., 12-14 (NKJV, NASB, NIV). The same material has been translated in each case; the only difference is the versification of that material.</p></p>
<p id="n4701316"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n4701316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “communion.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701317"><a href="file1138.xhtml#n4701317">17</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, especially later ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy bo), conclude this letter with <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”), while several early and significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B F G 0243 6 33 630 1175 1739 1881 sa) lack the particle. Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. That so many diverse witnesses lacked the word here is strong testimony to its absence for the original text of 2 Corinthians.</p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
