<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 22</h2>
<p id="n400221"><a href="file991.xhtml#n400221">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering again, Jesus spoke.” This construction is somewhat redundant in English and has been simplified in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n400222"><a href="file991.xhtml#n400222">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 8:9.</p></p>
<p id="n400223"><a href="file991.xhtml#n400223">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold, I have prepared my meal.” In some contexts, however, to translate <span class="greek">ἄριστον</span> (<span class="translit">ariston</span>) as “meal” or “dinner” somewhat misses the point. L&amp;N 23.22 here suggests, “See now, the feast I have prepared (for you is ready).”</p></p>
<p id="n400224"><a href="file991.xhtml#n400224">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400225"><a href="file991.xhtml#n400225">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400226"><a href="file991.xhtml#n400226">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he sent his soldiers, destroyed those murderers.” The verb <span class="greek">ἀπώλεσεν</span> (<span class="translit">apōlesen</span>) is causative, indicating that the king was the one behind the execution of the murderers. In English the causative idea is not expressed naturally here; either a purpose clause (“he sent his soldiers to put those murderers to death”) or a relative clause (“he sent his soldier who put those murderers to death”) is preferred. </p></p>
<p id="n400227"><a href="file991.xhtml#n400227">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek text reads here <span class="greek">πόλις</span> (<span class="translit">polis</span>), which could be translated “town” or “city.” The prophetic reference is to the city of Jerusalem, so “city” is more appropriate here.</p></p>
<p id="n400228"><a href="file991.xhtml#n400228">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he was silent.”</p></p>
<p id="n400229"><a href="file991.xhtml#n400229">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term translated “darkness” (<span class="greek">σκότος</span>) is associated with Tartarus in Aeschylus, <i>Eumenides</i> 72; other references to the darkness of death and the underworld can be found throughout the classical literature as far back as Homer. BDAG 932 s.v. <span class="greek">σκότος</span> 1 states: “Of the darkness of the place of punishment far removed fr. the heavenly kingdom (Philo, Exsecr. 152 <span class="greek">βαθὺ σκότος</span>. Cp. Wsd 17:20; PsSol 14:9.—<span class="greek">σκ. κ. βόρβορος</span> ‘gloom and muck’ await those who are untrue to the Eleusinian Mysteries, Ael. Aristid. 22, 10 K.=19 p. 421 D. Of the darkness of death and the underworld in Hom. and the Trag. As the domain of evil spirits PGM 36, 138; Theoph. Ant. 2, 7 [p. 110, 5]) <span class="greek">τὸ σκ. τὸ ἐξώτερον</span> the darkness outside Mt 8:12; 22:13; 25:30.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002210"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002210">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4002211"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “trap him in word.” </p></p>
<p id="n4002212"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002212">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>Herodians</i> are mentioned in the NT only once in Matt (22:16 = Mark 12:13) and twice in Mark (3:6; 12:13; some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> also read “Herodians” instead of “Herod” in Mark 8:15). It is generally assumed that as a group the Herodians were Jewish supporters of the Herodian dynasty (or of Herod Antipas in particular). In every instance they are linked with the Pharisees. This probably reflects agreement regarding political objectives (nationalism as opposed to submission to the yoke of Roman oppression) rather than philosophy or religious beliefs.</p></p>
<p id="n4002213"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002213">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Teach the way of God in accordance with the truth</i>. Very few comments are as deceitful as this one; they did not really believe this at all. The question of the Pharisees and Herodians was specifically designed to trap Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4002214"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it is not a concern to you about anyone because you do not see the face of men.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002215"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “lawful,” that is, in accordance with God’s divine law. On the syntax of <span class="greek">ἔξεστιν</span> (<span class="translit">exestin</span>) with an infinitive and accusative, see BDF §409.3.</p></p>
<p id="n4002216"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to L&amp;N 57.180 the term <span class="greek">κῆνσος</span> (<span class="translit">kēnsos</span>) was borrowed from Latin and referred to a poll tax, a tax paid by each adult male to the Roman government.</p><p><b>sn</b> This question concerning <i>taxes</i> was specifically designed to trap Jesus. If he answered yes, then his opponents could publicly discredit him as a sympathizer with Rome. If he answered no, then they could go to the Roman governor and accuse Jesus of rebellion.</p></p>
<p id="n4002217"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the emperor” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p></p>
<p id="n4002218"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate their response to Jesus’ request for a coin.</p></p>
<p id="n4002219"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the specific name of the coin was retained in the translation, because not all coins in circulation in Palestine at the time carried the image of Caesar. In other places <span class="greek">δηνάριον</span> (<span class="translit">dēnarion</span>) has been translated simply as “silver coin” with an explanatory note.</p><p><b>sn</b> A <i>denarius</i> was a silver coin worth approximately one day’s wage for a laborer. The fact that they had such a coin showed that they already operated in the economic world of Rome. The <i>denarius</i> would have had a picture of Tiberius Caesar stamped on it.</p></p>
<p id="n4002220"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002221"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “whose likeness.”</p><p><b>sn</b> In this passage Jesus points to the <i>image</i> (<i>Grk</i> <span class="greek">εἰκών</span>, <span class="translit">eikōn</span>) of Caesar on the coin. This same Greek word is used in Gen 1:26 (LXX) to state that humanity is made in the “image” of God. Jesus is making a subtle yet powerful contrast: Caesar’s image is on the denarius, so he can lay claim to money through taxation, but God’s image is on humanity, so he can lay claim to each individual life.</p></p>
<p id="n4002222"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002223"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “then he said to them.” <span class="greek">τότε</span> (<span class="translit">tote</span>) has not been translated to avoid redundancy.</p></p>
<p id="n4002224"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002224">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ answer to <i>give to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s</i> was a both/and, not the questioners’ either/or. So he slipped out of their trap.</p></p>
<p id="n4002225"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they were amazed.” </p></p>
<p id="n4002226"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002226">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Sadducees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4002227"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002227">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> This remark is best regarded as a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4002228"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and asked him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002229"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and raise up seed,” an idiom for fathering children (L&amp;N 23.59).</p></p>
<p id="n4002230"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002230">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 25:5. This practice is called levirate marriage (see also Ruth 4:1-12; Mishnah, <i>m. Yevamot;</i> Josephus<i>, Ant</i>. 4.8.23 [4.254-256]). The levirate law is described in Deut 25:5-10. The brother of a man who died without a son had an obligation to marry his brother’s widow. This served several purposes: It provided for the widow in a society where a widow with no children to care for her would be reduced to begging, and it preserved the name of the deceased, who would be regarded as the legal father of the first son produced from that marriage.</p></p>
<p id="n4002231"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002232"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For all had her.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002233"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, Jesus said to them.” This is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n4002234"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “mistaken” (cf. BDAG 822 s.v. <span class="greek">πλανάω</span> 2.c.<span class="greek">γ</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4002235"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002235">35</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses have “of God” after “angels,” although some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> read <span class="greek">ἄγγελοι θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">angeloi theou</span>; <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> L ƒ<sup>13</sup> 28 33 892 1241 1424) while others have <span class="greek">ἄγγελοι τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">angeloi tou theou</span>; W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 0102 0161 565 579 <span class="apparatus">M</span>). Whether with or without the article, the reading “of God” appears to be a motivated addition. A few significant witnesses lack the adjunct (B D <span class="greek">Θ</span> 0233 ƒ<sup>1</sup> 700 sa); this coupled with strong internal evidence argues for the authenticity of the shorter reading.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Angels</i> do not die, nor do they eat according to Jewish tradition (<i>1 En</i>. 15:6; 51:4; Wis 5:5; <i>2 Bar</i>. 51:10; 1QH 3.21-23).</p></p>
<p id="n4002236"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “spoken to you by God, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντος</span> (<span class="translit">legontos</span>) is redundant here in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002237"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002237">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 3:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4002238"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002238">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He is not God of the dead but of the living</i>. Jesus’ point was that if God could identify himself as God of the three old patriarchs, then they must still be alive when God spoke to Moses; and so they must be raised.</p></p>
<p id="n4002239"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002239">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4002240"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002240">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Sadducees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4002241"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the same.” That is, for the same purpose that the Sadducees had of testing Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4002242"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “a lawyer.” This was an expert in the interpretation of the Mosaic law.</p></p>
<p id="n4002243"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “testing.” The participle, however, is telic in force.</p></p>
<p id="n4002244"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002244">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “What sort of commandment in the law is great?”</p></p>
<p id="n4002245"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002246"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “You will love.” The future indicative is used here with imperatival force (see <i>ExSyn</i> 452 and 569).</p></p>
<p id="n4002247"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002247">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 6:5. The threefold reference to different parts of the person says, in effect, that one should love God with all one’s being.</p></p>
<p id="n4002248"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the great and first.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002249"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002249">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 19:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4002250"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002250">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hang.” The verb <span class="greek">κρεμάννυμι</span> (<span class="translit">kremannumi</span>) is used here with a figurative meaning (cf. BDAG 566 s.v. 2.b).</p></p>
<p id="n4002251"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002252"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002252">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4002253"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002253">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “asked them a question, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is somewhat redundant here in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002254"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002254">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4002255"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002255">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> It was a common belief in Judaism that Messiah would be <i>the son of David</i> in that he would come from the lineage of David. On this point the Pharisees agreed and were correct. But their understanding was nonetheless incomplete, for Messiah is also David’s Lord. With this statement Jesus was affirming that, as the Messiah, he is both God and man.</p></p>
<p id="n4002256"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002256">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Lord said to my lord</i>. With David being the speaker, this indicates his respect for his descendant (referred to as <i>my lord</i>). Jesus was arguing, as the ancient exposition assumed, that the passage is about the Lord’s anointed. The passage looks at an enthronement of this figure and a declaration of honor for him as he takes his place at the side of God. In Jerusalem, the king’s palace was located to the right of the temple to indicate this kind of relationship. Jesus was pressing the language here to get his opponents to reflect on how great Messiah is.</p></p>
<p id="n4002257"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002257">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 110:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4002258"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002258">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “how is he his son?”</p></p>
<p id="n4002259"><a href="file991.xhtml#n4002259">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
