<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Death of John the Baptist</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:1</span> At that time Herod the tetrarch<sup><a id="n400141" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n400141">1</a></sup> heard reports about Jesus, <span class="verse">14:2</span> and he said to his servants, “This is John the Baptist. He has been raised from the dead! And because of this, miraculous powers are at work in him.” <span class="verse">14:3</span> For Herod had arrested John, bound him,<sup><a id="n400142" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n400142">2</a></sup> and put him in prison on account of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife, <span class="verse">14:4</span> because John had repeatedly told<sup><a id="n400143" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n400143">3</a></sup> him, “It is not lawful for you to have her.”<sup><a id="n400144" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n400144">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:5</span> Although<sup><a id="n400145" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n400145">5</a></sup> Herod<sup><a id="n400146" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n400146">6</a></sup> wanted to kill John,<sup><a id="n400147" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n400147">7</a></sup> he feared the crowd because they accepted John as a prophet. <span class="verse">14:6</span> But on Herod’s birthday, the daughter of Herodias danced before them and pleased Herod, <span class="verse">14:7</span> so much that he promised<sup><a id="n400148" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n400148">8</a></sup> with an oath to give her whatever she asked. <span class="verse">14:8</span> Instructed by her mother, she said, “Give me the head of John the Baptist here on a platter.” <span class="verse">14:9</span> Although it grieved the king,<sup><a id="n400149" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n400149">9</a></sup> because of his oath and the dinner guests he commanded it to be given. <span class="verse">14:10</span> So<sup><a id="n4001410" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001410">10</a></sup> he sent and had John beheaded in the prison. <span class="verse">14:11</span> His<sup><a id="n4001411" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001411">11</a></sup> head was brought on a platter and given to the girl, and she brought it to her mother. <span class="verse">14:12</span> Then John’s<sup><a id="n4001412" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001412">12</a></sup> disciples came and took the body and buried it and went and told Jesus. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feeding of the Five Thousand </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:13</span> Now when Jesus heard this he went away from there privately in a boat<sup><a id="n4001413" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001413">13</a></sup> to an isolated place. But when the crowd heard about it,<sup><a id="n4001414" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001414">14</a></sup> they followed him on foot from the towns.<sup><a id="n4001415" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001415">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:14</span> As he got out he saw the large crowd, and he had compassion on them and healed their sick. <span class="verse">14:15</span> When evening arrived, his disciples came to him saying, “This is an isolated place<sup><a id="n4001416" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001416">16</a></sup> and the hour is already late. Send the crowds away so that they can go into the villages and buy food for themselves.” <span class="verse">14:16</span> But he<sup><a id="n4001417" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001417">17</a></sup> replied, “They don’t need to go. You<sup><a id="n4001418" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001418">18</a></sup> give them something to eat.” <span class="verse">14:17</span> They<sup><a id="n4001419" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001419">19</a></sup> said to him, “We have here only five loaves and two fish.” <span class="verse">14:18</span> “Bring them here to me,” he replied. <span class="verse">14:19</span> Then<sup><a id="n4001420" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001420">20</a></sup> he instructed the crowds to sit down on the grass. He took the five loaves and two fish, and looking up to heaven he gave thanks and broke the loaves. He gave them to the disciples,<sup><a id="n4001421" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001421">21</a></sup> who in turn gave them to the crowds.<sup><a id="n4001422" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001422">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:20</span> They all ate and were satisfied, and they picked up the broken pieces left over, twelve baskets full. <span class="verse">14:21</span> Not counting women and children, there were about 5,000 men who ate. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Walking on Water </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:22</span> Immediately Jesus<sup><a id="n4001423" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001423">23</a></sup> made the disciples get into the boat and go ahead of him to the other side, while he dispersed the crowds. <span class="verse">14:23</span> And after he sent the crowds away, he went up the mountain by himself to pray. When evening came, he was there alone. <span class="verse">14:24</span> Meanwhile the boat, already far from land,<sup><a id="n4001424" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001424">24</a></sup> was taking a beating from the waves because the wind was against it. <span class="verse">14:25</span> As the night was ending,<sup><a id="n4001425" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001425">25</a></sup> Jesus came to them walking on the sea.<sup><a id="n4001426" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001426">26</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:26</span> When<sup><a id="n4001427" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001427">27</a></sup> the disciples saw him walking on the water<sup><a id="n4001428" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001428">28</a></sup> they were terrified and said, “It’s a ghost!” and cried out with fear. <span class="verse">14:27</span> But immediately Jesus<sup><a id="n4001429" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001429">29</a></sup> spoke to them:<sup><a id="n4001430" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001430">30</a></sup> “Have courage! It is I. Do not be afraid.” <span class="verse">14:28</span> Peter<sup><a id="n4001431" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001431">31</a></sup> said to him,<sup><a id="n4001432" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001432">32</a></sup> “Lord, if it is you, order me to come to you on the water.” <span class="verse">14:29</span> So he said, “Come.” Peter got out of the boat, walked on the water, and came toward Jesus. <span class="verse">14:30</span> But when he saw the strong wind he became afraid. And starting to sink, he cried out,<sup><a id="n4001433" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001433">33</a></sup> “Lord, save me!” <span class="verse">14:31</span> Immediately Jesus reached out his hand and caught him, saying to him, “You of little faith, why did you doubt?” <span class="verse">14:32</span> When they went up into the boat, the wind ceased. <span class="verse">14:33</span> Then those who were in the boat worshiped him, saying, “Truly you are the Son of God.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:34</span> After they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret.<sup><a id="n4001434" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001434">34</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:35</span> When the people<sup><a id="n4001435" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001435">35</a></sup> there recognized him, they sent word into all the surrounding area, and they brought all their sick to him. <span class="verse">14:36</span> They begged him if<sup><a id="n4001436" href="file983_notes.xhtml#n4001436">36</a></sup> they could only touch the edge of his cloak, and all who touched it were healed. </p>

</body>
</html>