<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Thessalonians 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Thessalonians<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> So when we could bear it no longer, we decided to stay on in Athens alone. <span class="verse">3:2</span> We<sup><a id="n520032" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n520032">2</a></sup> sent Timothy, our brother and fellow worker for God<sup><a id="n520033" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n520033">3</a></sup> in the gospel of Christ, to strengthen you and encourage you about your faith, <span class="verse">3:3</span> so that no one would be shaken by these afflictions. For you yourselves know that we are destined for this. <span class="verse">3:4</span> For in fact when we were with you, we were telling you in advance that we would suffer affliction, and so it has happened, as you well know.<sup><a id="n520034" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n520034">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:5</span> So<sup><a id="n520035" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n520035">5</a></sup> when I could bear it no longer, I sent to find out about your faith, for fear that the tempter somehow tempted you and our toil had proven useless. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:6</span> But now Timothy has come<sup><a id="n520036" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n520036">6</a></sup> to us from you and given us the good news of your faith and love and that you always think of us with affection<sup><a id="n520037" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n520037">7</a></sup> and long to see us just as we also long to see you!<sup><a id="n520038" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n520038">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:7</span> So<sup><a id="n520039" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n520039">9</a></sup> in all our distress and affliction, we were reassured about you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5200310" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n5200310">10</a></sup> through your faith. <span class="verse">3:8</span> For now we are alive again,<sup><a id="n5200311" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n5200311">11</a></sup> if you stand firm in the Lord. <span class="verse">3:9</span> For how can we thank God enough for you,<sup><a id="n5200312" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n5200312">12</a></sup> for all the joy we feel<sup><a id="n5200313" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n5200313">13</a></sup> because of you before our God? <span class="verse">3:10</span> We pray earnestly night and day to see you in person<sup><a id="n5200314" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n5200314">14</a></sup> and make up what may be lacking in your faith. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:11</span> Now may God our Father himself and our Lord Jesus direct our way to you. <span class="verse">3:12</span> And may the Lord cause you to increase and abound in love for one another and for all, just as we do for you, <span class="verse">3:13</span> so that your hearts are strengthened in holiness to be blameless before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints.<sup><a id="n5200315" href="file1166_notes.xhtml#n5200315">15</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>