<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 5</h2>
<p id="n660051"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n660051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660052"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n660052">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “written on the inside and the outside” (an idiom for having writing on both sides).</p></p>
<p id="n660053"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n660053">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 6.55 states, “From the immediate context of Re 5:1 it is not possible to determine whether the scroll in question had seven seals on the outside or whether the scroll was sealed at seven different points. However, since according to chapter six of Revelation the seals were broken one after another, it would appear as though the scroll had been sealed at seven different places as it had been rolled up.”</p></p>
<p id="n660054"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n660054">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n660055"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n660055">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of no one being found worthy to open the scroll.</p></p>
<p id="n660056"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n660056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “much.”</p></p>
<p id="n660057"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n660057">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660058"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n660058">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “says” (a historical present).</p></p>
<p id="n660059"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n660059">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The present imperative with <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) is used here to command cessation of an action in progress (<i>ExSyn</i> 724 lists this verse as an example).</p></p>
<p id="n6600510"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has been victorious”; traditionally, “has overcome.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600511"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The infinitive has been translated as an infinitive of result here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600512"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6600513"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Perhaps, “in the middle of the throne area” (see L&amp;N 83.10).</p></p>
<p id="n6600514"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “slaughtered”; traditionally, “slain.” The phrase behind this translation is <span class="greek">ὡς ἐσφαγμένον</span> (<span class="translit">hōs esphagmenon</span>). The particle <span class="greek">ὡς</span> is used in Greek generally for comparison, and in Revelation it is used often to describe the appearance of what the author saw. This phrase does not imply that the Lamb “appeared to have been killed” but in reality was not, because the wider context of the NT shows that in fact the Lamb, i.e., Jesus, was killed. See 13:3 for the only other occurrence of this phrase in the NT.</p></p>
<p id="n6600515"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “killed, having.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the pronoun “he.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600516"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600516">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> The relative pronoun <i>which</i> is masculine, referring back to the <i>eyes</i> rather than to the <i>horns</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n6600517"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600517">17</a> <p><b>tc</b> There is good ms evidence for the inclusion of “seven” (<span class="greek">ἑπτά</span>, <span class="translit">hepta</span>; <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>24</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> 2053 2351 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup>). There is equally good ms support for the omission of the term (A 1006 1611 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup>). It may have been accidentally added due to its repeated presence in the immediately preceding phrases, or it may have been intentionally added to maintain the symmetry of the phrases or more likely to harmonize the phrase with 1:4; 3:1; 4:5. Or it may have been accidentally deleted by way of homoioteleuton (<span class="greek">τὰ ἑπτά</span>, <span class="translit">ta hepta</span>). A decision is difficult in this instance. NA<sup>28</sup> also does not find the problem easy to solve, placing the word in brackets to indicate doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n6600518"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600518">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the phrase <i>the seven spirits of God</i> in Rev 4:5.</p></p>
<p id="n6600519"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600520"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the scroll” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6600521"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fell down.” BDAG 815 s.v. <span class="greek">πίπτω</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span>. has “<i>fall down, throw oneself to the ground</i> as a sign of devotion or humility, before high-ranking persons or divine beings.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600522"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6600523"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600523">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> This interpretive comment by the author forms a parenthesis in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6600524"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The redundant participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600525"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “slaughtered”; traditionally, “slain.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600526"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The preposition <span class="greek">ἐν</span> (<span class="translit">en</span>) is taken to indicate price here, like the Hebrew preposition <span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span> (<span class="translit">bet</span>) does at times. BDAG 329 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐν</span> 5.b states, “The <span class="greek">ἐν</span> which takes the place of the gen. of price is also instrumental <span class="greek">ἠγόρασας ἐν τῷ αἵματί σου</span> Rv 5:9 (cp. 1 Ch 21:24 <span class="greek">ἀγοράζω ἐν ἀργυρίῳ</span>).”</p></p>
<p id="n6600527"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600527">27</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Greek text as it stands above (i.e., the reading <span class="greek">τῷ θεῷ</span> [<span class="translit">tō theō</span>] alone) is found in codex A. <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> 2050 2344 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy add the term “us” (<span class="greek">ἡμᾶς</span>, <span class="translit">hēmas</span>), either before or after <span class="greek">τῷ θεῷ</span>, as an attempt to clarify the object of “purchased” (<span class="greek">ἠγόρασας</span>, <span class="translit">ēgorasas</span>). A few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (1 vg<sup>ms</sup>) delete the reference to God altogether and simply replace it with “us” (<span class="greek">ἡμᾶς</span>). This too is an attempt to remove ambiguity in the phrase and provide an object for “purchased.” The shorter reading, supported by the best witness for Revelation, best accounts for the other readings.</p></p>
<p id="n6600528"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “persons” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6600529"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and language,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n6600530"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἐποίησας</span> (<span class="translit">epoiēsas</span>) is understood to mean “appointed” here. For an example of this use, see Mark 3:14. </p></p>
<p id="n6600531"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600531">31</a> <p><b>tc</b> The vast majority of witnesses have <span class="greek">αὐτούς</span> (<span class="translit">autous</span>, “them”) here, while the <i>Textus Receptus</i> reads <span class="greek">ἡμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">hēmas</span>, “us”) with insignificant support (<i>pc</i> gig vg<sup>cl</sup> sa Prim Bea). There is no question that the original text read <span class="greek">αὐτούς</span> here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600532"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The reference to “kingdom and priests” may be a hendiadys: “priestly kingdom.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600533"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to serve” are not in the Greek text, but are implied by the word “priests.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600534"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600534">34</a> <p><b>tc</b> The textual problem here between the present tense <span class="greek">βασιλεύουσιν</span> (<span class="translit">basileuousin</span>, “they are reigning”; so A 1006 1611 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup>) and the future <span class="greek">βασιλεύσουσιν</span> (<span class="translit">basileusousin</span>, “they will reign”; so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> 1854 2053 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup> lat co) is a difficult one. Both readings have excellent support. On the one hand, the present tense seems to be the harder reading in this context. On the other hand, codex A elsewhere mistakes the future for the present (20:6). Further, the lunate sigma in majuscule script could have been overlooked by some scribes, resulting in the present tense. All things considered, there is a slight preference for the future.</p></p>
<p id="n6600535"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600536"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600536">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “elders, and the number of them was.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6600537"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “myriads of myriads.” Although <span class="greek">μυριάς</span> (<span class="translit">murias</span>) literally means “10,000,” the point of the combination here may simply be to indicate an incalculably huge number. See L&amp;N 60.9.</p></p>
<p id="n6600538"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “all of whom” are not in the Greek text, but have been supplied to indicate the resumption of the phrase “the voice of many angels” at the beginning of the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n6600539"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600539">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600540"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600540">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “slaughtered”; traditionally, “slain.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600541"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600541">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600542"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600542">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600543"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dominion.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600544"><a href="file1238.xhtml#n6600544">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fell down.” BDAG 815 s.v. <span class="greek">πίπτω</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span>. has “<i>fall down, throw oneself to the ground</i> as a sign of devotion or humility, before high-ranking persons or divine beings.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
