<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 14</h2>
<p id="n440141"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n440141">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Iconium</i>. See the note in 13:51.</p></p>
<p id="n440142"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n440142">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referents (Paul and Barnabas) have been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n440143"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n440143">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n440144"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n440144">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “that a large crowd.”</p></p>
<p id="n440145"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n440145">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who would not believe.”</p></p>
<p id="n440146"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n440146">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “embittered their minds” (<i>Grk</i> “their souls”). BDAG 502 s.v. <span class="greek">κακόω</span> 2 has “<i>make angry, embitter</i> <span class="greek">τὰς ψυχάς τινων κατά τινος</span> <i>poison the minds of some persons against another</i> Ac 14:2.”</p></p>
<p id="n440147"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n440147">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “there” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n440148"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n440148">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Lord <i>testified</i> to the message by granting the signs described in the following clause.</p></p>
<p id="n440149"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n440149">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “word.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401410"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the context indicates the miraculous nature of the signs mentioned.</p></p>
<p id="n4401411"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 825 s.v. <span class="greek">πλῆθος</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">γ</span> has this translation for <span class="greek">πλῆθος</span> (<span class="translit">plēthos</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401412"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> These clauses are a good example of the contrastive <span class="greek">μὲν</span>…<span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">men</span>…<span class="translit">de</span>) construction: Some “on the one hand” sided with the Jews, but some “on the other hand” sided with the apostles.</p></p>
<p id="n4401413"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So there came about an attempt” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4401414"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this verb see BDAG 1022 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑβρίζω</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4401415"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The direct object “them” is repeated after both verbs in the translation for stylistic reasons, although it occurs only after <span class="greek">λιθοβολῆσαι</span> (<span class="translit">lithobolēsai</span>) in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n4401416"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referents (Paul and Barnabas) have been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401417"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “learning about it, fled.” The participle <span class="greek">συνιδόντες</span> (<span class="translit">sunidontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. It could also be taken temporally (“when they learned about it”) as long as opening clause of v. 5 is not translated as a temporal clause too, which results in a redundancy.</p></p>
<p id="n4401418"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401418">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lystra</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 18 mi (30 km) south of Iconium, a Roman colony that was not on the main roads of Lycaonia. Because of its relative isolation, its local character was able to be preserved.</p></p>
<p id="n4401419"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401419">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Derbe</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 35 mi (60 km) southeast of Lystra.</p></p>
<p id="n4401420"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “region, and there.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated and a new sentence begun in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4401421"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The periphrastic construction <span class="greek">εὐαγγελιζόμενοι</span> <span class="greek">ἦσαν</span> (<span class="translit">euangelizomenoi ēsan</span>) has been translated as a progressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4401422"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And in.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401423"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401423">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lystra</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 18 mi (30 km) south of Iconium.</p></p>
<p id="n4401424"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “powerless in his feet,” meaning he was unable to use his feet to walk.</p></p>
<p id="n4401425"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “lame from his mother’s womb” (an idiom).</p><p><b>sn</b> The description <i>lame from birth</i> makes clear how serious the condition was, and how real it was. This event is very similar to Acts 3:1-10, except here the lame man’s faith is clear from the start.</p></p>
<p id="n4401426"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “speaking, who.” The relative pronoun has been replaced by the noun “Paul,” and a new sentence begun in the translation because an English relative clause would be very awkward here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401427"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “looked.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401428"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401428">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 722 s.v. <span class="greek">ὀρθός</span> 1.a has “<i>stand upright on your feet</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401429"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401429">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401430"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb is imperfect tense in contrast to the previous verb, which is aorist. It has been translated ingressively, since the start of a sequence is in view here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401431"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they lifted up their voice” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4401432"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401432">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in Lycaonian, saying.” The word “language” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4401433"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401433">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> So BDAG 707 s.v. <span class="greek">ὁμοιόω</span> 1. However, L&amp;N 64.4 takes the participle <span class="greek">ὁμοιωθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">homoiōthentes</span>) as an adjectival participle modifying <span class="greek">θεοί</span> (<span class="translit">theoi</span>): “the gods resembling men have come down to us.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The gods have come down to us in human form</i>. Greek culture spoke of “divine men.” In this region there was a story of Zeus and Hermes visiting the area (Ovid, <i>Metamorphoses</i> 8.611-725). The locals failed to acknowledge them, so judgment followed. The present crowd was determined not to make the mistake a second time.</p></p>
<p id="n4401434"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401434">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐκάλουν</span> (<span class="translit">ekaloun</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4401435"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401435">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Zeus</i> was the chief Greek deity, worshiped throughout the Greco-Roman world (known to the Romans as Jupiter).</p></p>
<p id="n4401436"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401436">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Hermes</i> was a Greek god who (according to Greek mythology) was the messenger of the gods and the god of oratory (equivalent to the Roman god Mercury).</p></p>
<p id="n4401437"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401437">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the temple of” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. The translation “<i>the priest of (the temple/shrine of) Zeus located before the city</i>” is given for this phrase by BDAG 426 s.v. <span class="greek">Ζεύς</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4401438"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401438">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Zeus</i> in the previous verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401439"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401439">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “oxen.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401440"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401440">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “wreaths.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Garlands</i> were commonly wreaths of wool with leaves and flowers woven in, worn on a person’s head or woven around a staff. They were an important part of many rituals used to worship pagan gods. Although it was an erroneous reaction, the priest’s reaction shows how all acknowledged their power and access to God.</p></p>
<p id="n4401441"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401441">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to them” are not in the Greek text, but are clearly implied by the response of Paul and Barnabas in the following verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401442"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401442">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The apostles Barnabas and Paul</i>. This is one of only two places where Luke calls Paul an apostle, and the description here is shared with Barnabas. This is a nontechnical use here, referring to a commissioned messenger.</p></p>
<p id="n4401443"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401443">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἀκούσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">akousantes</span>) is taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4401444"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401444">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “tearing their clothes they rushed out.” The participle <span class="greek">διαρρήξαντες</span> (<span class="translit">diarrēxantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. This action is a Jewish response to blasphemy (<i>m. Sanhedrin</i> 7.5; Jdt 14:16-17).</p></p>
<p id="n4401445"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401445">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> So BDAG 307 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐκπηδάω</span> 1, “<i>rush</i> (lit. ‘leap’) <i>out</i>…<span class="greek">εἰς τὸν ὄχλον</span> <i>into the crowd</i> Ac 14:14.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401446"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401446">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “shouting and saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>, in v. 15) has not been translated because it is redundant.</p><p><b>sn</b> What follows is one of two speeches in Acts to a purely pagan audience (Acts 17 in Athens is the other). So Paul focused on God as Creator, a common link.</p></p>
<p id="n4401447"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401447">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with the same kinds of feelings,” L&amp;N 25.32. BDAG 706 s.v. <span class="greek">ὁμοιοπαθής</span> translates the phrase “<i>with the same nature</i> <span class="greek">τινί</span> <i>as someone</i>.” In the immediate context, the contrast is between human and divine nature, and the point is that Paul and Barnabas are mere mortals, not gods.</p></p>
<p id="n4401448"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401448">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in order that you should turn,” with <span class="greek">ἐπιστρέφειν</span> (<span class="translit">epistrephein</span>) as an infinitive of purpose, but this is somewhat awkward contemporary English. To translate the infinitive construction “proclaim the good news, that you should turn,” which is much smoother English, could give the impression that the infinitive clause is actually the content of the good news, which it is not. The somewhat less formal “to get you to turn” would work, but might convey to some readers manipulativeness on the part of the apostles. Thus “proclaim the good news, so that you should turn,” is used, to convey that the purpose of the proclamation of good news is the response by the hearers. The emphasis here is like 1 Thess 1:9-10.</p></p>
<p id="n4401449"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401449">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “useless,” “futile.” The reference is to idols and idolatry, worshiping the creation over the Creator (Rom 1:18-32). See also 1 Kgs 16:2, 13, 26; 2 Kgs 17:15; Jer 2:5; 8:19; 3 Macc 6:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4401450"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401450">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and the earth, and the sea,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated before “the earth” and “the sea” since contemporary English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4401451"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401451">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “them, who in.” The relative pronoun (“who”) was replaced by the pronoun “he” (“In past generations he”) and a new sentence was begun in the translation at this point to improve the English style, due to the length of the sentence in Greek and the awkwardness of two relative clauses (“who made the heaven” and “who in past generations”) following one another.</p></p>
<p id="n4401452"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401452">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term see BDAG 780 s.v. <span class="greek">παροίχομαι</span>. The word is a NT <i>hapax legomenon</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4401453"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401453">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “all the Gentiles” (in Greek the word for “nation” and “Gentile” is the same). The plural here alludes to the variety of false religions in the pagan world.</p></p>
<p id="n4401454"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401454">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἀγαθουργῶν</span> (<span class="translit">agathourgōn</span>) is regarded as indicating means here, parallel to the following participles <span class="greek">διδούς</span> (<span class="translit">didous</span>) and <span class="greek">ἐμπιπλῶν</span> (<span class="translit">empiplōn</span>). This is the easiest way to understand the Greek structure. Semantically, the first participle is a general statement, followed by two participles giving specific examples of doing good.</p></p>
<p id="n4401455"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401455">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from the sky” (the same Greek word means both “heaven” and “sky”).</p></p>
<p id="n4401456"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401456">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “satisfying [filling] your hearts with food and joy.” This is an idiomatic expression; it strikes the English reader as strange to speak of “filling one’s heart with food.” Thus the additional direct object “you” has been supplied, separating the two expressions somewhat: “satisfying <i>you</i> with food and your hearts with joy.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401457"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401457">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> God’s general sovereignty and gracious care in the creation are the way Paul introduces the theme of the goodness of God. He was trying to establish monotheism here. It is an OT theme (Gen 8:22; Pss 4:7; 145:15-16; 147:8-9; Isa 25:6; Jer 5:24) which also appears in the NT (Luke 12:22-34).</p></p>
<p id="n4401458"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401458">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is regarded as indicating means.</p></p>
<p id="n4401459"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401459">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 524 s.v. <span class="greek">καταπαύω</span> 2.b gives both “<i>restrain</i>” and “<i>dissuade someone fr. someth</i>.,” but “they scarcely dissuaded the crowds from offering sacrifice,” while accurate, is less common in contemporary English than saying “they scarcely persuaded the crowds not to offer sacrifice.” Paganism is portrayed as a powerful reality that is hard to reverse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401460"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401460">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Antioch</i> was a city in Pisidia about 90 mi (145 km) west northwest of Lystra.</p></p>
<p id="n4401461"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401461">61</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Iconium</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 18 mi (30 km) north of Lystra. Note how Jews from other cities were chasing Paul (2 Cor 11:4-6; Gal 2:4-5; Acts 9:16).</p></p>
<p id="n4401462"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401462">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">πείσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">peisantes</span>) is taken temporally (BDAG 791 s.v. <span class="greek">πείθω</span> 1.c).</p></p>
<p id="n4401463"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401463">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “stoning Paul they dragged him.” The participle <span class="greek">λιθάσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">lithasantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401464"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401464">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and entered”; the word “back” is not in the Greek text but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4401465"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401465">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And on.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401466"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401466">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Derbe</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 35 mi (60 km) southeast of Lystra. This was the easternmost point of the journey.</p></p>
<p id="n4401467"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401467">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lystra</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 35 mi (60 km) northwest of Derbe.</p></p>
<p id="n4401468"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401468">68</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Iconium</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 18 mi (30 km) north of Lystra.</p></p>
<p id="n4401469"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401469">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Antioch</i> was a city in Pisidia about 90 mi (145 km) west northwest of Lystra.</p></p>
<p id="n4401470"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401470">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to Antioch, strengthening.” Due to the length of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English to use shorter sentences, a new sentence was started here. This participle (<span class="greek">ἐπιστηρίζοντες</span>, <span class="translit">epistērizontes</span>) and the following one (<span class="greek">παρακαλοῦντες</span>, <span class="translit">parakalountes</span>) have been translated as finite verbs connected by the coordinating conjunction “and.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401471"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401471">71</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>And encouraged them to continue</i>. The exhortations are like those noted in Acts 11:23; 13:43. An example of such a speech is found in Acts 20:18-35. Christianity is now characterized as “the faith.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401472"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401472">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> This reference to <i>the kingdom of God</i> clearly refers to its arrival as future, although this does not automatically rule out a present manifestation of the kingdom as well. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21; Acts 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4401473"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401473">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sufferings.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401474"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401474">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Appointed elders</i>. See Acts 20:17.</p></p>
<p id="n4401475"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401475">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> The preposition <span class="greek">κατά</span> (<span class="translit">kata</span>) is used here in a distributive sense; see BDAG 512 s.v. <span class="greek">κατά</span> B.1.d.</p></p>
<p id="n4401476"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401476">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Literally with a participle (<span class="greek">προσευξάμενοι</span>, <span class="translit">proseuxamenoi</span>) rather than a noun, “praying with fasting,” but the combination “prayer and fasting” is so familiar in English that it is preferable to use it here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401477"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401477">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 772 s.v. <span class="greek">παρατίθημι</span> 3.b has “<i>entrust someone to the care</i> or <i>protection of someone</i>” for this phrase. The reference to persecution or suffering in the context (v. 22) suggests “protection” is a better translation here. This looks at God’s ultimate care for the church.</p></p>
<p id="n4401478"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401478">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then passing through Pisidia they came.” The participle <span class="greek">διελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">dielthontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401479"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401479">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Pamphylia</i> was a province along the southern coast of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4401480"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401480">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “message.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401481"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401481">81</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Perga</i> was a city in Pamphylia near the southern coast of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4401482"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401482">82</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Attalia</i> was a seaport in the province of Pamphylia on the southern coast of Asia Minor, about 12 mi (20 km) southwest of Perga.</p></p>
<p id="n4401483"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401483">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Antioch</i> was the city in Syria (not Antioch in Pisidia) from which Paul’s first missionary journey began (see Acts 13:1-4). That first missionary journey ends here, after covering some 1,400 mi (2,240 km).</p></p>
<p id="n4401484"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401484">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “committed.” BDAG 762 s.v. <span class="greek">παραδίδωμι</span> 2 gives “<i>commended to the grace of God for the work</i> 14:26” as the meaning for this phrase, although “<i>give over</i>” and “<i>commit</i>” are listed as alternative meanings for this category.</p></p>
<p id="n4401485"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401485">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 829 s.v. <span class="greek">πληρόω</span> 5 has “to bring to completion an activity in which one has been involved from its beginning, <i>complete, finish</i>” as meanings for this category. The ministry to which they were commissioned ends with a note of success.</p></p>
<p id="n4401486"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401486">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “announced.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401487"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401487">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note that <i>God</i> is the subject of the activity. The outcome of this mission is seen as a confirmation of the mission to the Gentiles.</p></p>
<p id="n4401488"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401488">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the image of <i>opening</i>, or of the <i>door</i>, see 1 Cor 16:9; 2 Cor 2:12; Col 4:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4401489"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401489">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 238 s.v. <span class="greek">διατρίβω</span> gives the meaning as “<i>spend</i>” when followed by an accusative <span class="greek">τὸν χρόνον</span> (<span class="translit">ton chronon</span>) which is the case here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401490"><a href="file1076.xhtml#n4401490">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “no little (time)” (an idiom).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
