<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Corinthians 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Corinthians<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Way of Love</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but I do not have love, I am a noisy gong or a clanging cymbal. <span class="verse">13:2</span> And if I have prophecy, and know all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have all faith so that I can remove mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing. <span class="verse">13:3</span> If I give away everything I own, and if I give over my body in order to boast,<sup><a id="n460131" href="file1121_notes.xhtml#n460131">1</a></sup> but do not have love, I receive no benefit. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:4</span> Love is patient, love is kind, it is not envious. Love does not brag, it is not puffed up. <span class="verse">13:5</span> It is not rude, it is not self-serving, it is not easily angered or resentful. <span class="verse">13:6</span> It is not glad about injustice, but rejoices in the truth. <span class="verse">13:7</span> It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:8</span> Love never ends. But if there are prophecies, they will be set aside; if there are tongues, they will cease; if there is knowledge, it will be set aside. <span class="verse">13:9</span> For we know in part, and we prophesy in part, <span class="verse">13:10</span> but when what is perfect<sup><a id="n460132" href="file1121_notes.xhtml#n460132">2</a></sup> comes, the partial will be set aside. <span class="verse">13:11</span> When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. But when I became an adult,<sup><a id="n460133" href="file1121_notes.xhtml#n460133">3</a></sup> I set aside childish ways. <span class="verse">13:12</span> For now we see in a mirror indirectly,<sup><a id="n460134" href="file1121_notes.xhtml#n460134">4</a></sup> but then we will see face to face. Now I know in part, but then I will know fully, just as I have been fully known. <span class="verse">13:13</span> And now these three remain: faith, hope, and love. But the greatest of these is love. </p>

</body>
</html>