<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 12</h2>
<p id="n660121"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n660121">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660122"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n660122">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Sun</i>…<i>moon</i>…<i>stars</i>. This imagery is frequently identified with the nation Israel because of Joseph’s dream in Gen 37.</p></p>
<p id="n660123"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n660123">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n660124"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n660124">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and being tortured,” though <span class="greek">βασανίζω</span> (<span class="translit">basanizō</span>) in this context refers to birth pangs. BDAG 168 s.v. 2.b states, “Of birth-pangs (Anth. Pal. 9, 311 <span class="greek">βάσανος</span> has this mng.) Rv 12:2.” The <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n660125"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n660125">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660126"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n660126">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation of <span class="greek">διάδημα</span> (<span class="translit">diadēma</span>) as “diadem crown” see L&amp;N 6.196.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Diadem crowns</i> were a type of crown used as a symbol of the highest ruling authority in a given area, and thus often associated with kingship.</p></p>
<p id="n660127"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n660127">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate that this remark is virtually parenthetical.</p></p>
<p id="n660128"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n660128">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “its”; the referent (the dragon) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n660129"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n660129">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601210"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the conclusion of the anticipated birth.</p></p>
<p id="n6601211"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 135 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄρσην</span> states: “<i>male</i>…The neut. <span class="greek">ἄρσεν</span> Rv 12:5, difft. vs. 13, comes fr. Is 66:7 and is in apposition to <span class="greek">υἱόν</span>. On the juxtaposition s. FBoll, ZNW 15, 1914, 253; BOlsson, Glotta 23, ’34, 112.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601212"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “shepherd.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601213"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “all the Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601214"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scepter.” The Greek term <span class="greek">ῥάβδος</span> (<span class="translit">rhabdos</span>) can mean either “rod” or “scepter.” </p><p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 2:9 (see also Rev 2:27; 19:15).</p></p>
<p id="n6601215"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601216"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and the woman,” which would be somewhat redundant in English.</p></p>
<p id="n6601217"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601218"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “where she has there a place prepared by God.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601219"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so they can take care of her.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601220"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601221"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601221">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> The archangel <i>Michael</i> had a special role in protecting the nation of Israel in the OT (Dan 10:13, 21; 12:1; see also Jude 9).</p></p>
<p id="n6601222"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the implied contrast.</p></p>
<p id="n6601223"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to prevail” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n6601224"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “found.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601225"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for them”; the referent (the dragon and his angels, v. 7) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601226"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the result of the war in heaven.</p></p>
<p id="n6601227"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601228"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the right of his Messiah to rule.” See L&amp;N 37.35.</p></p>
<p id="n6601229"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601230"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” or “fellow Christians” (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited). The translation “fellow believer” would normally apply (L&amp;N 11.23), but since the speaker(s) are not specified in this context, it is not clear if such a translation would be appropriate here. The more generic “brothers and sisters” was chosen to emphasize the fact of a relationship without specifying its type.</p></p>
<p id="n6601231"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who accuses them continually.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601232"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast.</p></p>
<p id="n6601233"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601233">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They did not love their lives</i>. See Matt 16:25; Luke 17:33; John 12:25.</p></p>
<p id="n6601234"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “But” is not in the Greek text, but the contrast is clearly implied. This is a case of asyndeton (lack of a connective).</p></p>
<p id="n6601235"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and is filled,” a continuation of the previous sentence. Because English tends to use shorter sentences (especially when exclamations are involved), a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6601236"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” because the clause it introduces is clearly resumptive. </p></p>
<p id="n6601237"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saw.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601238"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present here.</p></p>
<p id="n6601239"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601240"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601240">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “God” is supplied based on the previous statements made concerning “the place prepared for the woman” in 12:6.</p></p>
<p id="n6601241"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601241">41</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading “and half a time” (<span class="greek">καὶ ἥμισυ καιροῦ</span>, <span class="translit">kai hēmisu kairou</span>) is lacking in the significant majuscule C. Its inclusion, however, is supported by <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>47</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A and the rest of the ms tradition. There is apparently no reason for the scribe of C to intentionally omit the phrase, and the fact that the word “time” (<span class="greek">καιρὸν καὶ καιρούς</span>, <span class="translit">kairon kai kairous</span>) appears twice before may indicate a scribal oversight.</p><p><b>sn</b> The parallel statement in Rev 12:6 suggests that the phrase <i>a time, times, and half a time</i> equals 1,260 days (three and a half years of 360 days each).</p></p>
<p id="n6601242"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601243"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that he might make her swept away.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601244"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601244">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present here.</p></p>
<p id="n6601245"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the earth helped the woman.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601246"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the earth opened its mouth” (a metaphor for the ground splitting open).</p></p>
<p id="n6601247"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601247">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the woman’s escape.</p></p>
<p id="n6601248"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “her seed” (an idiom for offspring, children, or descendants).</p></p>
<p id="n6601249"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601249">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who obey.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601250"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601250">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and having.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601251"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the testimony of Jesus,” which may involve a subjective genitive (“Jesus’ testimony”) or, more likely, an objective genitive (“testimony about Jesus”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601252"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601252">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the dragon) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601253"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601253">53</a> <p><b>tc</b> <i>Grk</i> <span class="greek">ἐστάθη</span> (<span class="translit">estathē</span>, “he stood”). The reading followed by the translation is attested by the better <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>47</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C 1854 2344 2351 lat sy<sup>h</sup>) while the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (051 <span class="apparatus">M</span> vg<sup>mss</sup> sy<sup>ph</sup> co) have the reading <span class="greek">ἐστάθην</span> (<span class="translit">estathēn</span>, “I stood”). Thus, the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> make the narrator, rather than the dragon of 12:17, the subject of the verb. The first person reading is most likely an assimilation to the following verb in 13:1, “I saw.” The reading “I stood” was introduced either by accident or to produce a smoother flow, giving the narrator a vantage point on the sea’s edge from which to observe the beast rising out of the sea in 13:1. But almost everywhere else in the book, the phrase <span class="greek">καὶ εἶδον</span> (<span class="translit">kai eidon</span>, “and I saw”) marks a transition to a new vision, without reference to the narrator’s activity. On both external and internal grounds, it is best to adopt the third person reading, “he stood.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601254"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601254">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sandy beach” (L&amp;N 1.64).</p></p>
<p id="n6601255"><a href="file1245.xhtml#n6601255">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> The standard critical texts of the Greek NT, NA<sup>28</sup> and UBS<sup>5</sup>, both include this sentence as <b>12:18</b>, as do the RSV and NRSV. Other modern translations like the NASB and NIV include the sentence at the beginning of <b>13:1</b>; in these versions chap. 12 has only 17 verses.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
