<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for John 8</h2>
<p id="n43007140"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43007140">140</a> <p><b>tc</b> This entire section, 7:53-8:11, traditionally known as the <i>pericope adulterae</i>, is not contained in the earliest and best <span class="smcaps">mss</span> and was almost certainly not an original part of the Gospel of John. Among modern commentators and textual critics, it is a foregone conclusion that the section is not original but represents a later addition to the text of the Gospel. B. M. Metzger summarizes: “the evidence for the non-Johannine origin of the pericope of the adulteress is overwhelming” (<i>TCGNT</i> 187). External evidence is as follows. For the omission of 7:53-8:11: <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L N T W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0141 0211 33 565 1241 1424* 2768 <i>al</i>. In addition codices A and C are defective in this part of John, but it appears that neither contained the pericope because careful measurement shows that there would not have been enough space on the missing pages to include the pericope 7:53-8:11 along with the rest of the text. Among the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that include 7:53-8:11 are D <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat. In addition E S <span class="greek">Λ</span> 1424<sup>mg</sup> <i>al</i> include part or all of the passage with asterisks or obeli, 225 places the pericope after John 7:36, ƒ<sup>1</sup> places it after John 21:25, 115 and a few others after John 8:12, ƒ<sup>13</sup> after Luke 21:38, and the corrector of 1333 includes it after Luke 24:53. (For a more complete discussion of the locations where this “floating” text has ended up, as well as a minority opinion on the authenticity of the passage, see M. A. Robinson, “Preliminary Observations regarding the <i>Pericope Adulterae</i> Based upon Fresh Collations of nearly All Continuous-Text Manuscripts and All Lectionary Manuscripts containing the Passage,” <i>Filologia Neotestamentaria</i> 13 [2000]: 35-59, especially 41-42.) In evaluating this ms evidence, it should be remembered that in the Gospels A is considered to be Byzantine (unlike in the epistles and Revelation, where it is Alexandrian), as are E F G (<span class="smcaps">mss</span> with the same designation are Western in the epistles). This leaves D as the only major Western majuscule witness in the Gospels for the inclusion. Therefore the evidence could be summarized by saying that almost all early <span class="smcaps">mss</span> of the Alexandrian text-form omit the pericope, while most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> of the Western and Byzantine families include it. But it must be remembered that “Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span>” here refers only to D, a single witness (as far as Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span> are concerned). Thus it can be seen that practically all of the earliest and best <span class="smcaps">mss</span> extant omit the pericope; it is found only in <span class="smcaps">mss</span> of secondary importance. But before one can conclude that the passage was not originally part of the Gospel of John, internal evidence needs to be considered as well. Internal evidence in favor of the inclusion of 8:1-11 (7:53-8:11): (1) 7:53 fits in the context. If the “last great day of the feast” (7:37) refers to the conclusion of the Feast of Tabernacles, then the statement refers to the pilgrims and worshipers going home after living in “booths” for the week while visiting Jerusalem. (2) There may be an allusion to Isa 9:1-2 behind this text: John 8:12 is the point when Jesus describes himself as the Light of the world. But the section in question mentions that Jesus returned to the temple at “early dawn” (<span class="greek">῎Ορθρου</span>, <span class="translit">Orthrou</span>, in 8:2). This is the “dawning” of the Light of the world (8:12) mentioned by Isa 9:2. (3) Furthermore, note the relationship to what follows: Just prior to presenting Jesus’ statement that he is the Light of the world, John presents the reader with an example that shows Jesus as the light. Here the woman “came to the light” while her accusers shrank away into the shadows, because their deeds were evil (cf. 3:19-21). Internal evidence against the inclusion of 8:1-11 (7:53-8:11): (1) In reply to the claim that the introduction to the pericope, 7:53, fits the context, it should also be noted that the narrative reads well without the pericope, so that Jesus’ reply in 8:12 is directed against the charge of the Pharisees in 7:52 that no prophet comes from Galilee. (2) The assumption that the author “must” somehow work Isa 9:1-2 into the narrative is simply that—an assumption. The statement by the Pharisees in 7:52 about Jesus’ Galilean origins is allowed to stand without correction by the author, although one might have expected him to mention that Jesus was really born in Bethlehem. And 8:12 does directly mention Jesus’ claim to be the Light of the world. The author may well have presumed familiarity with Isa 9:1-2 on the part of his readers because of its widespread association with Jesus among early Christians. (3) The fact that the pericope deals with the light/darkness motif does not inherently strengthen its claim to authenticity, because the motif is so prominent in the Fourth Gospel that it may well have been the reason why someone felt that the pericope, circulating as an independent tradition, fit so well here. (4) In general the style of the pericope is not Johannine either in vocabulary or grammar (see D. B. Wallace, “Reconsidering ‘The Story of the Woman Taken in Adultery Reconsidered’,” <i>NTS</i> 39 [1993]: 290-96). According to R. E. Brown it is closer stylistically to Lukan material (<i>John</i> [AB], 1:336). Interestingly one significant family of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (ƒ<sup>13</sup>) places the pericope after Luke 21:38. Conclusion: In the final analysis, the weight of evidence in this case must go with the external evidence. The earliest and best <span class="smcaps">mss</span> do not contain the pericope. It is true with regard to internal evidence that an attractive case can be made for inclusion, but this is by nature subjective (as evidenced by the fact that strong arguments can be given against such as well). In terms of internal factors like vocabulary and style, the pericope does not stand up very well. The question may be asked whether this incident, although not an original part of the Gospel of John, should be regarded as an authentic tradition about Jesus. It could well be that it is ancient and may indeed represent an unusual instance where such a tradition survived outside of the bounds of the canonical literature. However, even that needs to be nuanced (see B. D. Ehrman, “Jesus and the Adulteress,” <i>NTS</i> 34 [1988]: 24-44).</p><p><b>sn</b> Double brackets have been placed around this passage to indicate that most likely it was not part of the original text of the Gospel of John. In spite of this, the passage has an important role in the history of the transmission of the text, so it has been included in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n430081"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n430081">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Mount of Olives</i> is a hill running north to south about 1.8 mi (3 km) long, lying east of Jerusalem across the Kidron Valley. It was named for the large number of olive trees that grew on it.</p></p>
<p id="n430082"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n430082">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> An ingressive sense for the imperfect fits well here following the aorist participle.</p></p>
<p id="n430083"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n430083">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The scribes.” The traditional rendering of <span class="greek">γραμματεύς</span> (<span class="translit">grammateus</span>) as “scribe” does not communicate much to the modern English reader, for whom the term might mean “professional copyist,” if it means anything at all. The people referred to here were recognized experts in the law of Moses and in traditional laws and regulations. Thus “expert in the law” comes closer to the meaning for the modern reader.</p></p>
<p id="n430084"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n430084">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 1:24.</p></p>
<p id="n430085"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n430085">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n430086"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n430086">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Lev 20:10 and Deut 22:22-24.</p></p>
<p id="n430087"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n430087">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> The accusers themselves subtly misrepresented the law. The Mosaic law stated that in the case of adultery, both the man and woman must be put to death (Lev 20:10, Deut 22:22), but they mentioned only <i>such women</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n430088"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n430088">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that they could accuse.”</p></p>
<p id="n430089"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n430089">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author of 7:53-8:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4300810"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300810">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “Jesus bent down and wrote an accusation on the ground with his finger.” The Greek verb <span class="greek">καταγράφω</span> (<span class="translit">katagraphō</span>) may indicate only the action of writing on the ground by Jesus, but in the overall context (Jesus’ response to the accusation against the woman) it can also be interpreted as implying that what Jesus wrote was a counteraccusation against the accusers (although there is no clue as to the actual content of what he wrote, some scribes added “the sins of each one of them” either here or at the end of v. 8 [U 264 700 <i>al</i>]).</p></p>
<p id="n4300811"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300811">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “he straightened up.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300812"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300812">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300813"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300813">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sinless.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300814"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300814">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative. Greek style often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” but English style generally does not.</p></p>
<p id="n4300815"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “beginning from the eldest.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300816"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300816">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “straightened up.” </p></p>
<p id="n4300817"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300817">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Woman</i> was a polite form of address (see BDAG 208-9 s.v. <span class="greek">γυνή</span> 1), similar to “Madam” or “Ma’am” used in English in different regions.</p></p>
<p id="n4300818"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300818">18</a> <p><b>tc</b> The earliest and best <span class="smcaps">mss</span> do not contain <b>7:53-8:11</b> (see note on 7:53).</p></p>
<p id="n4300819"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300819">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then again Jesus spoke to them saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300820"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300820">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> The theory proposed by F. J. A. Hort (<i>The New Testament in the Original Greek,</i> vol. 2, <i>Introduction; Appendix</i>, 87-88), that the backdrop of 8:12 is the lighting of the candelabra in the court of women, may offer a plausible setting to the proclamation by Jesus that he is <i>the light of the world</i>. The last time that Jesus spoke in the narrative (assuming 7:53-8:11 is not part of the original text, as the textual evidence suggests) is in 7:38, where he was speaking to a crowd of pilgrims in the temple area. This is where he is found in the present verse, and he may be addressing the crowd again. Jesus’ remark has to be seen in view of both the prologue (John 1:4, 5) and the end of the discourse with Nicodemus (John 3:19-21). The coming of Jesus into the world provokes judgment: A choosing up of sides becomes necessary. The one who comes to the light, that is, who follows Jesus, will <i>not</i> walk in the darkness. The one who refuses to come, <i>will</i> walk in the darkness. In this contrast, there are only two alternatives. So it is with a person’s decision about Jesus. Furthermore, this serves as in implicit indictment of Jesus’ opponents, who still walk in the darkness, because they refuse to come to him. This sets up the contrast in chap. 9 between the man born blind, who receives both physical and spiritual sight, and the Pharisees (John 9:13, 15, 16) who have physical sight but remain in spiritual darkness.</p></p>
<p id="n4300821"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300821">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The double negative <span class="greek">οὐ μή</span> (<span class="translit">ou mē</span>) is emphatic in 1st century Hellenistic Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n4300822"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300822">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 1:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4300823"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300823">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then the Pharisees said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300824"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300824">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> Compare the charge <i>You testify about yourself; your testimony is not true!</i> to Jesus’ own statement about his testimony in 5:31.</p></p>
<p id="n4300825"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300825">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus answered and said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300826"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300826">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is supplied in the translation to indicate that the pronoun (“you”) and verb (“do not know”) in Greek are plural.</p></p>
<p id="n4300827"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300827">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>You people do not know where I came from or where I am going</i>. The ignorance of the religious authorities regarding Jesus’ origin works on two levels at once: First, they thought Jesus came from Galilee (although he really came from Bethlehem in Judea) and second, they did not know that he came from heaven (from the Father), and this is where he would return. See further John 7:52.</p></p>
<p id="n4300828"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300828">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is supplied in the translation to indicate that the pronoun and verb (“judge”) in Greek are plural.</p></p>
<p id="n4300829"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300829">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “judge according to external things”; <i>Grk</i> “according to the flesh.” These translations are given by BDAG 916 s.v. <span class="greek">σάρξ</span> 5.</p></p>
<p id="n4300830"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300830">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> What is the meaning of Jesus’ statement “<i>I do not judge anyone</i>”? It is clear that Jesus did judge (even in the next verse). The point is that he didn’t practice the same kind of judgment that the Pharisees did. Their kind of judgment was condemnatory. They tried to condemn people. Jesus did not come to judge the world, but to save it (3:17). Nevertheless, and not contradictory to this, the coming of Jesus did bring judgment, because it forced people to make a choice. Would they accept Jesus or reject him? Would they come to the light or shrink back into the darkness? As they responded, so were they judged—just as 3:19-21 previously stated. One’s response to Jesus determines one’s eternal destiny.</p></p>
<p id="n4300831"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300831">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my judgment is true.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300832"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300832">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “when I judge” is not in the Greek text, but is implied by the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4300833"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300833">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “do so together” is not in the Greek text, but is implied by the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4300834"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300834">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Deut 17:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4300835"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300835">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I am the one who testifies about myself.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300836"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300836">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then they were saying to him.” The imperfect verb has been translated with ingressive force here because of the introduction of a new line of questioning by the Pharisees. Jesus had just claimed his Father as a second witness; now his opponents want to know who his father is.</p></p>
<p id="n4300837"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300837">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>If you knew me you would know my Father too</i>. Jesus’ reply is based on his identity with the Father (see also John 1:18; 14:9).</p></p>
<p id="n4300838"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300838">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300839"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300839">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">γαζοφυλάκιον</span> (<span class="translit">gazophulakion</span>) can be translated “treasury” or “treasure room” in this context. BDAG 186 s.v. 1 notes, “It can be taken in this sense J 8:20 (sing.) <i>in</i> (or <i>at</i>) <i>the treasury</i>.” BDAG 186 s.v. 2 argues that the occurrences of this word in the synoptic gospels also refer to the treasury: “For Mk 12:41, 43; Lk 21:1 the mng. <i>contribution box</i> or <i>receptacle</i> is attractive. Acc. to Mishnah, Shekalim 6, 5 there were in the temple 13 such receptacles in the form of trumpets. But even in these passages the general sense of ‘treasury’ is prob., for the contributions would go [into] the treasury via the receptacles.” Based upon the extra-biblical evidence (see <b>sn</b> following), however, the translation opts to refer to the actual receptacles and not the treasury itself.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>offering box</i> probably refers to the receptacles in the temple forecourt by the Court of Women used to collect freewill offerings. These are mentioned by Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 5.5.2 (5.200), 6.5.2 (6.282); <i>Ant</i>. 19.6.1 (19.294); and in 1 Macc 14:49 and 2 Macc 3:6, 24, 28, 40 (see also Mark 12:41; Luke 21:1).</p></p>
<p id="n4300840"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300840">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300841"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300841">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300842"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300842">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4300843"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300843">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300844"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300844">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression <span class="greek">οὖν πάλιν</span> (<span class="translit">oun palin</span>) indicates some sort of break in the sequence of events, but it is not clear how long. The author does not mention the interval between 8:12-20 and this next recorded dialogue. The feast of Tabernacles is past, and the next reference to time is 10:22, where the feast of the Dedication is mentioned. The interval is two months, and these discussions could have taken place at any time within that interval, as long as one assumes something of a loose chronological framework. However, if the material in the Fourth Gospel is arranged theologically or thematically, such an assumption would not apply.</p></p>
<p id="n4300845"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300845">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you will seek me.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300846"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300846">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression <span class="greek">ἐν τῇ ἁμαρτίᾳ ὑμῶν ἀποθανεῖσθε</span> (<span class="translit">en tē hamartia humōn apothaneisthe</span>) is similar to an expression found in the LXX at Ezek 3:18, 20 and Prov 24:9. Note the singular of <span class="greek">ἁμαρτία</span> (the plural occurs later in v. 24). To die with one’s sin unrepented and unatoned would be the ultimate disaster to befall a person. Jesus’ warning is stern but to the point.</p></p>
<p id="n4300847"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300847">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” In NT usage the term <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαῖοι</span> (<span class="translit">Ioudaioi</span>) may refer to the entire Jewish people, the residents of Jerusalem and surrounding territory, the authorities in Jerusalem, or merely those who were hostile to Jesus. (For further information see R. G. Bratcher, “‘The Jews’ in the Gospel of John,” <i>BT</i> 26 [1975]: 401-9.) Here the phrase refers to the Jewish authorities or leaders in Jerusalem. It was the Pharisees who had begun this line of questioning in John 8:13, and there has been no clear change since then in the identity of Jesus’ opponents.</p></p>
<p id="n4300848"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300848">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb has been translated with ingressive force (“began to say”) because the comments that follow were occasioned by Jesus’ remarks in the preceding verse about his upcoming departure.</p></p>
<p id="n4300849"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300849">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300850"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300850">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is supplied in English to clarify the plural Greek pronoun and verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4300851"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300851">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “thus I said to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300852"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300852">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “unless you believe that I am.” In this context there is an implied predicate nominative (“he”) following the “I am” phrase. What Jesus’ hearers had to acknowledge is that he was who he claimed to be, i.e., the Messiah (cf. 20:31). This view is also reflected in English translations like NIV (“if you do not believe that I am the one I claim to be”), NLT (“unless you believe that I am who I say I am”), and CEV (“if you don’t have faith in me for who I am”). For a different view that takes this “I am” and the one in 8:28 as nonpredicated (i.e., absolute), see R. E. Brown, <i>John</i> (AB), 1:533-38. Such a view sees the nonpredicated “I am” as a reference to the divine Name revealed in Exod 3:14, and is reflected in English translations like NAB (“if you do not believe that I AM, you will die in your sins”) and TEV (“you will die in your sins if you do not believe that ‘I Am Who I Am’”).</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:20.</p></p>
<p id="n4300853"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300853">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300854"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300854">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I have many things to pronounce in judgment about you.” The two Greek infinitives could be understood as a hendiadys, resulting in one phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n4300855"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300855">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one”; the referent (the Father) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300856"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300856">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “true” (in the sense of one who always tells the truth).</p></p>
<p id="n4300857"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300857">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and what things I have heard from him, these things I speak to the world.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300858"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300858">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They did not understand…about his Father</i> is a parenthetical note by the author. This type of comment, intended for the benefit of the reader, is typical of the “omniscient author” convention adopted by the author, who is writing from a postresurrection point of view. He writes with the benefit of later knowledge that those who originally heard Jesus’ words would not have had.</p></p>
<p id="n4300859"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300859">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then Jesus said to them” (the words “to them” are not found in all <span class="smcaps">mss</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4300860"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300860">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that I am.” See the note on this phrase in v. 24.</p></p>
<p id="n4300861"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300861">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I do nothing from myself.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300862"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300862">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but just as the Father taught me, these things I speak.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300863"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300863">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “he has not abandoned me.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300864"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300864">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied for clarity and smoothness in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4300865"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300865">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the Jews.” In NT usage the term <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαῖοι</span> (<span class="translit">Ioudaioi</span>) may refer to the entire Jewish people, the residents of Jerusalem and surrounding territory (i.e., “Judeans”), the authorities in Jerusalem, or merely those who were hostile to Jesus. (For further information see R. G. Bratcher, “‘The Jews’ in the Gospel of John,” <i>BT</i> 26 [1975]: 401-9; also BDAG 479 s.v. <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαῖος</span> 2.e.) Here the phrase refers to the Jewish people in Jerusalem who had been listening to Jesus’ teaching in the temple and had believed his claim to be the Messiah, hence, “those Judeans who had believed him.” The term “Judeans” is preferred here to the more general “people” because the debate concerns descent from Abraham (v. 33).</p></p>
<p id="n4300866"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300866">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “If you continue in my word.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300867"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300867">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “truly.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300868"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300868">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the truth will release you.” The translation “set you free” or “release you” (unlike the more traditional “make you free”) conveys more the idea that the hearers were currently in a state of slavery from which they needed to be freed. The following context supports precisely this idea.</p><p><b>sn</b> The statement <i>the truth will set you free</i> is often taken as referring to <i>truth</i> in the philosophical (or absolute) sense, or in the intellectual sense, or even (as the Jews apparently took it) in the political sense. In the context of John’s Gospel (particularly in light of the prologue) this must refer to <i>truth</i> about the person and work of Jesus. It is saving truth. As L. Morris says, “it is the truth which saves men from the darkness of sin, not that which saves them from the darkness of error (though there is a sense in which men in Christ are delivered from gross error)” (<i>John</i> [NICNT], 457).</p></p>
<p id="n4300869"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300869">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “We are the seed” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4300870"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300870">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They answered to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300871"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300871">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “How is it that you say.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300872"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300872">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly, truly, I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300873"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300873">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who commits.” This could simply be translated, “everyone who sins,” but the Greek is more emphatic, using the participle <span class="greek">ποιῶν</span> (<span class="translit">poiōn</span>) in a construction with <span class="greek">πᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">pas</span>), a typical Johannine construction. Here repeated, continuous action is in view. The one whose lifestyle is characterized by repeated, continuous sin is a slave to sin. That one is not free; sin has enslaved him. To break free from this bondage requires outside (divine) intervention. Although the statement is true at the general level (the person who continually practices a lifestyle of sin is enslaved to sin) the particular sin of the Jewish authorities, repeatedly emphasized in the Fourth Gospel, is the sin of unbelief. The present tense in this instance looks at the continuing refusal on the part of the Jewish leaders to acknowledge who Jesus is, in spite of mounting evidence.</p></p>
<p id="n4300874"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300874">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slaves” in 4:51.</p></p>
<p id="n4300875"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300875">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “household.” The Greek work <span class="greek">οἰκία</span> (<span class="translit">oikia</span>) can denote the family as consisting of relatives by both descent and marriage, as well as slaves and servants, living in the same house (more the concept of an “extended family”).</p></p>
<p id="n4300876"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300876">76</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ point is that while a slave may be part of a family or household, the slave is not guaranteed a permanent place there, while a <i>son</i>, as a descendant or blood relative, will always be guaranteed a place in the family (<i>remains forever</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n4300877"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300877">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Son.” The question is whether “son” is to be understood as a direct reference to Jesus himself, or as an indirect reference (a continuation of the generic illustration begun in the previous verse).</p></p>
<p id="n4300878"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300878">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seed” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4300879"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300879">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you are seeking.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300880"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300880">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my word.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300881"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300881">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “finds no place in you.” The basic idea seems to be something (in this case Jesus’ teaching) making headway or progress where resistance is involved. See BDAG 1094 s.v. <span class="greek">χωρέω</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4300882"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300882">82</a> <p><b>tc</b> The first person pronoun <span class="greek">μου</span> (<span class="translit">mou</span>, “my”) may be implied, especially if <span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">humōn</span>, “your”) follows the second mention of “father” in this verse (as it does in the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span>); no doubt this implication gave rise to the reading <span class="greek">μου</span> found in most witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> D <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0250 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it sy). No pronoun here is read by <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> B C L 070. This problem cannot be isolated from the second in the verse, however. See that discussion below.</p></p>
<p id="n4300883"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300883">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The things which I have seen with the Father I speak about.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300884"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300884">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300885"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300885">85</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few significant witnesses lack <span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">humōn</span>, “your”) here (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> B L W 070), while the majority have the pronoun (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C D <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0250 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 565 892 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> lat sy). However, these <span class="smcaps">mss</span> do not agree on the placement of the pronoun: <span class="greek">τοῦ πατρὸς ὑμῶν ποιεῖτε</span> (<span class="translit">tou patros humōn poieite</span>), <span class="greek">τῷ πατρὶ ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">tō patri humōn</span>), and <span class="greek">τῷ πατρὶ ὑμῶν ταῦτα</span> (<span class="translit">tō patri humōn tauta</span>) all occur. If the pronoun is read, then the devil is in view and the text should be translated as “you are practicing the things you have heard from your father.” If it is not read, then the same Father mentioned in the first part of the verse is in view. In this case, <span class="greek">ποιεῖτε</span> should be taken as an imperative: “you [must] practice the things you have heard from the Father.” The omission is decidedly the harder reading, both because the contrast between God and the devil is now delayed until v. 41, and because <span class="greek">ποιεῖτε</span> could be read as an indicative, especially since the two clauses are joined by <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”). Thus, the pronoun looks to be a motivated reading. In light of the better external and internal evidence the omission is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4300886"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300886">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They answered and said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300887"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300887">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Our father is Abraham.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300888"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300888">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300889"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300889">89</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (C W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0250 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have the imperfect <span class="greek">ἦτε</span> (<span class="translit">ēte</span>, “you were”) here, making this sentence a proper second class condition, the harder reading, <span class="greek">ἐστε</span> (<span class="translit">este</span>, “you are”), is found in the better witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D L 070 lat).</p></p>
<p id="n4300890"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300890">90</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66</sup> B* [700]) have the present imperative <span class="greek">ποιεῖτε</span> (<span class="translit">poieite</span>) here: “If you are Abraham’s children, then do,” while many others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> C K L N <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 565 579 892 <i>pm</i>) add the contingent particle <span class="greek">ἄν</span> (<span class="translit">an</span>) to <span class="greek">ἐποιεῖτε</span> (<span class="translit">epoieite</span>) making it a more proper second class condition by Attic standards. The simple <span class="greek">ἐποιεῖτε</span> without the <span class="greek">ἄν</span> is the hardest reading, and is found in some excellent witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B<sup>2</sup> D W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> 070 0250 1424 <i>pm</i>).</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “you would do.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300891"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300891">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seeking.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300892"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300892">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has spoken to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300893"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300893">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word order is emphatic: “This Abraham did not do.” The emphasis is indicated in the translation by an exclamation point.</p></p>
<p id="n4300894"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300894">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied in English to clarify the plural Greek pronoun and verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4300895"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300895">95</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Significant and early witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L W 070 it sy<sup>s,p</sup> co) lack the conjunction here, while the earliest witnesses along with many others read <span class="greek">οὖν</span> (<span class="translit">oun</span>, “therefore”; <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> C D <span class="greek">Θ Ψ</span> 0250 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span>). This conjunction occurs in John some 200 times, far more than in any other NT book. Even though the combined testimony of two early papyri for the conjunction is impressive, the reading seems to be a predictable scribal emendation. In particular, <span class="greek">οὖν</span> is frequently used with the plural of <span class="greek">εἶπον</span> (<span class="translit">eipon</span>, “they said”) in John (in this chapter alone, note vv. 13, 39, 48, 57, and possibly 52). On balance, it is probably best to consider the shorter reading as authentic, even though “Then” is virtually required in translation for English stylistic reasons. NA<sup>28</sup> has the conjunction in brackets, indicating some doubt as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300896"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300896">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) is specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300897"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300897">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>We were not born as a result of immorality!</i> is ironic, because Jesus’ opponents implied that it was not themselves but Jesus who had been born as a result of immoral behavior. This shows they did not know Jesus’ true origin and were not aware of the supernatural events surrounding his birth. The author does not even bother to refute the opponents’ suggestion but lets it stand, assuming his readers will know the true story.</p></p>
<p id="n4300898"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300898">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300899"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n4300899">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I came from God and have arrived.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008100"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For I.” Here <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n43008101"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from myself.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008102"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that one” (referring to God).</p></p>
<p id="n43008103"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you cannot hear,” but this is not a reference to deafness, but rather hearing in the sense of listening to something and responding to it.</p></p>
<p id="n43008104"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my word.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008105"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is supplied in the translation to clarify that the Greek pronoun and verb are plural.</p></p>
<p id="n43008106"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> Many translations read “You are of your father the devil” (KJV, ASV, RSV, NASB) or “You belong to your father, the devil” (NIV), but the Greek preposition <span class="greek">ἐκ</span> (<span class="translit">ek</span>) emphasizes the idea of source or origin. Jesus said his opponents were the devil’s very offspring (a statement which would certainly infuriate them).</p></p>
<p id="n43008107"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the desires of your father you want to do.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008108"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “That one” (referring to the devil).</p></p>
<p id="n43008109"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he does not stand in the truth” (in the sense of maintaining, upholding, or accepting the validity of it).</p></p>
<p id="n43008110"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Whenever he speaks the lie.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008111"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he speaks from his own.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008112"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because he is a liar and the father of it.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008113"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because I tell you.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008114"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “can convict me.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008115"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of having sinned”; <i>Grk</i> “of sin.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008116"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “if I tell you.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008117"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who is of.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008118"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to God hears” (in the sense of listening to something and responding to it).</p></p>
<p id="n43008119"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you do not hear” (in the sense of listening to something and responding to it).</p></p>
<p id="n43008120"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you are not of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008121"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” See the note on this term in v. 31. Here the phrase refers to the Jewish people in Jerusalem (“Judeans”; cf. BDAG 479 s.v. <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαῖος</span> 2.e) who had been listening to Jesus’ teaching in the temple courts (8:20) and had initially believed his claim to be the Messiah (cf. 8:31). They had become increasingly hostile as Jesus continued to teach. Now they were ready to say that Jesus was demon-possessed.</p></p>
<p id="n43008122"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered and said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008123"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Do we not say rightly.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008124"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and have a demon.” It is not clear what is meant by the charge <span class="greek">Σαμαρίτης εἶ σὺ καὶ δαιμόνιον ἔχεις</span> (<span class="translit">Samaritēs ei su kai daimonion echeis</span>). The meaning could be “you are a heretic and are possessed by a demon.” Note that the dual charge gets one reply (John 8:49). Perhaps the phrases were interchangeable: Simon Magus (Acts 8:14-24) and in later traditions Dositheus, the two Samaritans who claimed to be sons of God, were regarded as mad, that is, possessed by demons.</p></p>
<p id="n43008125"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I do not have a demon.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008126"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Yet” is supplied to show the contrastive element present in the context.</p></p>
<p id="n43008127"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I am not seeking.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008128"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my glory.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008129"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who seeks.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008130"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will be the judge.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008131"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly, truly, I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008132"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “If anyone keeps.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008133"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my word.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008134"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he will never see death forever.” The Greek negative here is emphatic.</p><p><b>sn</b> Those who keep Jesus’ words will not <i>see death</i> because they have already passed from death to life (cf. 5:24). In Johannine theology eternal life begins in the present rather than in the world to come.</p></p>
<p id="n43008135"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008135">135</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Significant and early witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C W <span class="greek">Θ</span> 579 it) lack the conjunction here, while other witnesses read <span class="greek">οὖν</span> (<span class="translit">oun</span>, “therefore”; <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> D L<span class="greek"> Ψ</span> 070 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat). This conjunction occurs in John some 200 times, far more than in any other NT book. Even though the most important Johannine papyrus (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup>) has the conjunction, the combination of <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B for the omission is even stronger. Further, the reading seems to be a predictable scribal emendation. In particular, <span class="greek">οὖν</span> is frequently used with the plural of <span class="greek">εἶπον</span> (<span class="translit">eipon</span>, “they said”) in John (in this chapter alone, note vv. 13, 39, 48, 57, and possibly 41). On balance, it is probably best to consider the shorter reading as authentic, even though “Then” is virtually required in translation for English stylistic reasons. NA<sup>28</sup> has the conjunction in brackets, indicating some doubt as to its authenticity. </p></p>
<p id="n43008136"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” See the note on this term in v. 31. Here, as in vv. 31 and 48, the phrase refers to the Jewish people in Jerusalem (“Judeans”; cf. BDAG 479 s.v. <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαῖος</span> 2.e) who had been listening to Jesus’ teaching in the temple courts (8:20) and had initially believed his claim to be the Messiah (cf. 8:31).</p></p>
<p id="n43008137"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008138"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you have a demon.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008139"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008139">139</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Yet” has been supplied to show the contrastive element present in the context.</p></p>
<p id="n43008140"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “If anyone keeps.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008141"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008141">141</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my word.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008142"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008142">142</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will never taste.” Here the Greek verb does not mean “sample a small amount” (as a typical English reader might infer from the word “taste”), but “experience something cognitively or emotionally; come to know something” (cf. BDAG 195 s.v. <span class="greek">γεύομαι</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n43008143"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008143">143</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he will never taste of death forever.” The Greek negative here is emphatic.</p></p>
<p id="n43008144"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008144">144</a> <p><b>tn</b> Questions prefaced with <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) in Greek anticipate a negative answer. This can sometimes be indicated by using a “tag” at the end in English (here the tag is “are you?”).</p></p>
<p id="n43008145"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008145">145</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus answered.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008146"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008146">146</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is nothing.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008147"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008147">147</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied in English to clarify the plural Greek pronoun and verb.</p></p>
<p id="n43008148"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008148">148</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Yet” to indicate the contrast present in the context.</p></p>
<p id="n43008149"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008149">149</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “If I say, ‘I do not know him.’”</p></p>
<p id="n43008150"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008150">150</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I keep.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008151"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008151">151</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his word.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008152"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008152">152</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rejoiced greatly.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008153"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008153">153</a> <p><b>tn</b> What is the meaning of Jesus’ statement that the patriarch Abraham “saw” his day and rejoiced? The use of past tenses would seem to refer to something that occurred during the patriarch’s lifetime. <i>Genesis Rabbah</i> 44:25ff, (cf. 59:6) states that Rabbi Akiba, in a debate with Rabbi Johanan ben Zakkai, held that Abraham had been shown not this world only but the world to come (this would include the days of the Messiah). More realistically, it is likely that Gen 22:13-15 lies behind Jesus’ words. This passage, known to rabbis as the <i>Akedah</i> (“Binding”), tells of Abraham finding the ram which will replace his son Isaac on the altar of sacrifice—an occasion of certain rejoicing.</p></p>
<p id="n43008154"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008154">154</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then the Jews.” See the note on this term in v. 31. Here, as in vv. 31, 48, and 52, the phrase refers to the Jewish people in Jerusalem (“Judeans”; cf. BDAG 479 s.v. <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαῖος</span> 2.e) who had been listening to Jesus’ teaching in the temple courts (8:20) and had initially believed his claim to be the Messiah (cf. 8:31). They have now become completely hostile, as John 8:59 clearly shows.</p></p>
<p id="n43008155"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008155">155</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008156"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008156">156</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> ‘You do not yet have fifty years” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n43008157"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008157">157</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And have.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008158"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008158">158</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly, truly, I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008159"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008159">159</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “before Abraham was.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008160"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008160">160</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I am!</i> is an explicit claim to deity. Although each occurrence of the phrase “I am” in the Fourth Gospel needs to be examined individually in context to see if an association with Exod 3:14 is present, it seems clear that this is the case here (as the response of the Jewish authorities in the following verse shows).</p></p>
<p id="n43008161"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008161">161</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they took up.”</p></p>
<p id="n43008162"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008162">162</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ Jewish listeners understood his claim to deity, rejected it, and <i>picked up stones to throw at him</i> for what they considered blasphemy.</p></p>
<p id="n43008163"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008163">163</a> <p><b>tn</b> The prepositional phrase “from them” has been supplied to clarify that the passive verb “was hidden” does not mean that Jesus turned invisible, but rather that his opponents were not able to find him at that moment.</p></p>
<p id="n43008164"><a href="file1048.xhtml#n43008164">164</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most later witnesses (A <span class="greek">Θ</span><sup>c</sup> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have at the end of the verse “passing through their midst, he went away in this manner” (<span class="greek">διελθὼν διὰ μέσου καὶ παρῆγεν οὕτως</span>, <span class="translit">dielthōn dia mesou kai parēgen houtōs</span>), while many others have similar permutations (so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1,2</sup> C L N <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 070 33 579 892 1241 <i>al</i>). The wording is similar to two other texts: Luke 4:30 (<span class="greek">διελθὼν διὰ μέσου</span>; in several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> <span class="greek">αὐτῶν ἐπορεύετο καί</span> [<span class="translit">autōn eporeueto kai</span>] is found between this phrase and <span class="greek">παρῆγεν</span>, strengthening the parallel with Luke 4:30) and John 9:1 (<span class="greek">παρῆγεν</span>; cf. <span class="greek">παράγων</span> [<span class="translit">paragōn</span>] there). The effect is to signal Jesus’ departure as a miraculous cloaking. As such, the additional statement has all the earmarks of scribal amplification. Further, the best and earliest witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B D W <span class="greek">Θ</span>* lat sa) lack these words, rendering the shorter text virtually certain.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the temple.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
