<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Mark 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Rejection at Nazareth </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> Now<sup><a id="n410061" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n410061">1</a></sup> Jesus left that place and came to his hometown,<sup><a id="n410062" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n410062">2</a></sup> and his disciples followed him. <span class="verse">6:2</span> When the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue.<sup><a id="n410063" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n410063">3</a></sup> Many who heard him were astonished, saying, “Where did he get these ideas?<sup><a id="n410064" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n410064">4</a></sup> And what is this wisdom that has been given to him? What are these miracles that are done through his hands? <span class="verse">6:3</span> Isn’t this the carpenter, the son<sup><a id="n410065" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n410065">5</a></sup> of Mary<sup><a id="n410066" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n410066">6</a></sup> and brother of James, Joses, Judas, and Simon? And aren’t his sisters here with us?” And so they took offense at him. <span class="verse">6:4</span> Then<sup><a id="n410067" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n410067">7</a></sup> Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his hometown, and among his relatives, and in his own house.” <span class="verse">6:5</span> He was not able to do a miracle there, except to lay his hands on a few sick people and heal them. <span class="verse">6:6</span> And he was amazed because of their unbelief. Then<sup><a id="n410068" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n410068">8</a></sup> he went around among the villages and taught. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Sending Out the Twelve Apostles </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:7</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n410069" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n410069">9</a></sup> called the twelve and began to send them out two by two. He gave them authority over the unclean spirits.<sup><a id="n4100610" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100610">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:8</span> He instructed them to take nothing for the journey except a staff<sup><a id="n4100611" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100611">11</a></sup> —no bread, no bag,<sup><a id="n4100612" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100612">12</a></sup> no money in their belts— <span class="verse">6:9</span> and to put on sandals but not to wear two tunics.<sup><a id="n4100613" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100613">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:10</span> He said to them, “Wherever you enter a house, stay there<sup><a id="n4100614" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100614">14</a></sup> until you leave the area. <span class="verse">6:11</span> If a place will not welcome you or listen to you, as you go out from there, shake the dust off<sup><a id="n4100615" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100615">15</a></sup> your feet as a testimony against them.” <span class="verse">6:12</span> So<sup><a id="n4100616" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100616">16</a></sup> they went out and preached that all should repent. <span class="verse">6:13</span> They cast out many demons and anointed many sick people with olive oil and healed them.</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Death of John the Baptist</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:14</span> Now<sup><a id="n4100617" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100617">17</a></sup> King Herod<sup><a id="n4100618" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100618">18</a></sup> heard this, for Jesus’<sup><a id="n4100619" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100619">19</a></sup> name had become known. Some<sup><a id="n4100620" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100620">20</a></sup> were saying, “John the baptizer<sup><a id="n4100621" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100621">21</a></sup> has been raised from the dead, and because of this, miraculous powers are at work in him.” <span class="verse">6:15</span> Others said, “He is Elijah.” Others said, “He is a prophet, like one of the prophets from the past.” <span class="verse">6:16</span> But when Herod heard this, he said, “John, whom I beheaded, has been raised!” <span class="verse">6:17</span> For Herod himself had sent men, arrested John, and bound him in prison on account of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife, because Herod<sup><a id="n4100622" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100622">22</a></sup> had married her. <span class="verse">6:18</span> For John had repeatedly told<sup><a id="n4100623" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100623">23</a></sup> Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.”<sup><a id="n4100624" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100624">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:19</span> So Herodias nursed a grudge against him and wanted to kill him. But<sup><a id="n4100625" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100625">25</a></sup> she could not <span class="verse">6:20</span> because Herod stood in awe of<sup><a id="n4100626" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100626">26</a></sup> John and protected him, since he knew that John<sup><a id="n4100627" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100627">27</a></sup> was a righteous and holy man. When Herod<sup><a id="n4100628" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100628">28</a></sup> heard him, he was thoroughly baffled,<sup><a id="n4100629" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100629">29</a></sup> and yet<sup><a id="n4100630" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100630">30</a></sup> he liked to listen to John.<sup><a id="n4100631" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100631">31</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:21</span> But<sup><a id="n4100632" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100632">32</a></sup> a suitable day<sup><a id="n4100633" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100633">33</a></sup> came, when Herod gave a banquet on his birthday for his court officials, military commanders, and leaders of Galilee. <span class="verse">6:22</span> When his daughter Herodias<sup><a id="n4100634" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100634">34</a></sup> came in and danced, she pleased Herod and his dinner guests. The king said to the girl, “Ask me for whatever you want and I will give it to you.” <span class="verse">6:23</span> He swore to her,<sup><a id="n4100635" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100635">35</a></sup> “Whatever you ask I will give you, up to half my kingdom.”<sup><a id="n4100636" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100636">36</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:24</span> So<sup><a id="n4100637" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100637">37</a></sup> she went out and said to her mother, “What should I ask for?” Her mother said,<sup><a id="n4100638" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100638">38</a></sup> “The head of John the baptizer.”<sup><a id="n4100639" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100639">39</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:25</span> Immediately she hurried back to the king and made her request:<sup><a id="n4100640" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100640">40</a></sup> “I want the head of John the Baptist on a platter immediately.” <span class="verse">6:26</span> Although it grieved the king deeply,<sup><a id="n4100641" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100641">41</a></sup> he did not want to reject her request because of his oath and his guests. <span class="verse">6:27</span> So<sup><a id="n4100642" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100642">42</a></sup> the king sent an executioner at once to bring John’s<sup><a id="n4100643" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100643">43</a></sup> head, and he went and beheaded John in prison. <span class="verse">6:28</span> He brought his head on a platter and gave it to the girl, and the girl gave it to her mother. <span class="verse">6:29</span> When John’s<sup><a id="n4100644" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100644">44</a></sup> disciples heard this, they came and took his body and placed it in a tomb. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feeding of the Five Thousand</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:30</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100645" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100645">45</a></sup> the apostles gathered around Jesus and told him everything they had done and taught. <span class="verse">6:31</span> He said to them, “Come with me privately to an isolated place and rest a while” (for many were coming and going, and there was no time to eat). <span class="verse">6:32</span> So they went away by themselves in a boat<sup><a id="n4100646" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100646">46</a></sup> to some remote place. <span class="verse">6:33</span> But many saw them leaving and recognized them, and they hurried on foot<sup><a id="n4100647" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100647">47</a></sup> from all the towns<sup><a id="n4100648" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100648">48</a></sup> and arrived there ahead of them.<sup><a id="n4100649" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100649">49</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:34</span> As Jesus<sup><a id="n4100650" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100650">50</a></sup> came ashore<sup><a id="n4100651" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100651">51</a></sup> he saw the large crowd and he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. So<sup><a id="n4100652" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100652">52</a></sup> he taught them many things. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:35</span> When it was already late, his disciples came to him and said, “This is an isolated place<sup><a id="n4100653" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100653">53</a></sup> and it is already very late. <span class="verse">6:36</span> Send them away so that they can go into the surrounding countryside and villages and buy something for themselves to eat.” <span class="verse">6:37</span> But he answered them,<sup><a id="n4100654" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100654">54</a></sup> “You<sup><a id="n4100655" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100655">55</a></sup> give them something to eat.” And they said, “Should we go and buy bread for 200 silver coins<sup><a id="n4100656" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100656">56</a></sup> and give it to them to eat?” <span class="verse">6:38</span> He said to them, “How many loaves do you have? Go and see.” When they found out, they said, “Five—and two fish.” <span class="verse">6:39</span> Then he directed them all to sit down in groups on the green grass. <span class="verse">6:40</span> So they reclined in groups of hundreds and fifties. <span class="verse">6:41</span> He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke the loaves. He<sup><a id="n4100657" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100657">57</a></sup> gave them to his<sup><a id="n4100658" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100658">58</a></sup> disciples to serve the people, and he divided the two fish among them all. <span class="verse">6:42</span> They all ate and were satisfied, <span class="verse">6:43</span> and they picked up the broken pieces and fish that were left over, twelve baskets full. <span class="verse">6:44</span> Now<sup><a id="n4100659" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100659">59</a></sup> there were 5,000 men<sup><a id="n4100660" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100660">60</a></sup> who ate the bread.<sup><a id="n4100661" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100661">61</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Walking on Water </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:45</span> Immediately Jesus<sup><a id="n4100662" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100662">62</a></sup> made his disciples get into the boat<sup><a id="n4100663" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100663">63</a></sup> and go on ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he dispersed the crowd. <span class="verse">6:46</span> After saying goodbye to them, he went to the mountain to pray. <span class="verse">6:47</span> When evening came, the boat was in the middle of the sea and he was alone on the land. <span class="verse">6:48</span> He<sup><a id="n4100664" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100664">64</a></sup> saw them straining at the oars, because the wind was against them. As the night was ending,<sup><a id="n4100665" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100665">65</a></sup> he came to them walking on the sea,<sup><a id="n4100666" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100666">66</a></sup> for<sup><a id="n4100667" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100667">67</a></sup> he wanted to pass by them.<sup><a id="n4100668" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100668">68</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:49</span> When they saw him walking on the water<sup><a id="n4100669" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100669">69</a></sup> they thought he was a ghost. They<sup><a id="n4100670" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100670">70</a></sup> cried out, <span class="verse">6:50</span> for they all saw him and were terrified. But immediately he spoke to them:<sup><a id="n4100671" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100671">71</a></sup> “Have courage! It is I. Do not be afraid.” <span class="verse">6:51</span> Then he went up with them into the boat, and the wind ceased. They were completely astonished, <span class="verse">6:52</span> because they did not understand about the loaves, but their hearts were hardened. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing the Sick </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:53</span> After they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret<sup><a id="n4100672" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100672">72</a></sup> and anchored there. <span class="verse">6:54</span> As they got out of the boat, people immediately recognized Jesus.<sup><a id="n4100673" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100673">73</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:55</span> They ran through that whole region and began to bring the sick on mats to wherever he was rumored to be.<sup><a id="n4100674" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100674">74</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:56</span> And wherever he would go—into villages, towns, or countryside—they would place the sick in the marketplaces,<sup><a id="n4100675" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100675">75</a></sup> and would ask him if<sup><a id="n4100676" href="file1004_notes.xhtml#n4100676">76</a></sup> they could just touch the edge of his cloak, and all who touched it were healed. </p>

</body>
</html>