<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 20</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 20</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Workers in the Vineyard</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:1</span> “For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner<sup><a id="n400201" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n400201">1</a></sup> who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard. <span class="verse">20:2</span> And after agreeing with the workers for the standard wage,<sup><a id="n400202" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n400202">2</a></sup> he sent them into his vineyard. <span class="verse">20:3</span> When it was about nine o’clock in the morning,<sup><a id="n400203" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n400203">3</a></sup> he went out again and saw others standing around in the marketplace<sup><a id="n400204" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n400204">4</a></sup> without work. <span class="verse">20:4</span> He said to them, ‘You go into the vineyard too, and I will give you whatever is right.’ <span class="verse">20:5</span> So they went. When<sup><a id="n400205" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n400205">5</a></sup> he went out again about noon and three o’clock that afternoon,<sup><a id="n400206" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n400206">6</a></sup> he did the same thing. <span class="verse">20:6</span> And about five o’clock that afternoon<sup><a id="n400207" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n400207">7</a></sup> he went out and found others standing around, and said to them, ‘Why are you standing here all day without work?’ <span class="verse">20:7</span> They said to him, ‘Because no one hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You go and work in the vineyard too.’ <span class="verse">20:8</span> When<sup><a id="n400208" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n400208">8</a></sup> it was evening<sup><a id="n400209" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n400209">9</a></sup> the owner of the vineyard said to his manager, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages<sup><a id="n4002010" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002010">10</a></sup> starting with the last hired until the first.’ <span class="verse">20:9</span> When those hired about five o’clock came, each received a full day’s pay.<sup><a id="n4002011" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002011">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:10</span> And when those hired first came, they thought they would receive more. But each one also received the standard wage. <span class="verse">20:11</span> When<sup><a id="n4002012" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002012">12</a></sup> they received it, they began to complain<sup><a id="n4002013" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002013">13</a></sup> against the landowner, <span class="verse">20:12</span> saying, ‘These last fellows worked one hour, and you have made them equal to us who bore the hardship and burning heat of the day.’ <span class="verse">20:13</span> And the landowner<sup><a id="n4002014" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002014">14</a></sup> replied to one of them,<sup><a id="n4002015" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002015">15</a></sup> ‘Friend, I am not treating you unfairly. Didn’t you agree with me to work for the standard wage?<sup><a id="n4002016" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002016">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:14</span> Take what is yours and go. I<sup><a id="n4002017" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002017">17</a></sup> want to give to this last man<sup><a id="n4002018" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002018">18</a></sup> the same as I gave to you. <span class="verse">20:15</span> Am I not<sup><a id="n4002019" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002019">19</a></sup> permitted to do what I want with what belongs to me? Or are you envious because I am generous?’<sup><a id="n4002020" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002020">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:16</span> So the last will be first, and the first last.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Third Prediction of Jesus’ Death and Resurrection </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:17</span> As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve<sup><a id="n4002021" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002021">21</a></sup> aside privately and said to them on the way, <span class="verse">20:18</span> “Look, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and the experts in the law.<sup><a id="n4002022" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002022">22</a></sup> They will condemn him to death, <span class="verse">20:19</span> and will turn him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and flogged severely<sup><a id="n4002023" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002023">23</a></sup> and crucified.<sup><a id="n4002024" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002024">24</a></sup> Yet<sup><a id="n4002025" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002025">25</a></sup> on the third day, he will be raised.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Request for James and John </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:20</span> Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, and kneeling down she asked him for a favor.<sup><a id="n4002026" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002026">26</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:21</span> He said to her, “What do you want?” She replied,<sup><a id="n4002027" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002027">27</a></sup> “Permit<sup><a id="n4002028" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002028">28</a></sup> these two sons of mine to sit, one at your<sup><a id="n4002029" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002029">29</a></sup> right hand and one at your left, in your kingdom.” <span class="verse">20:22</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4002030" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002030">30</a></sup> answered, “You don’t know what you are asking!<sup><a id="n4002031" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002031">31</a></sup> Are you able to drink the cup I am about to drink?”<sup><a id="n4002032" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002032">32</a></sup> They said to him, “We are able.”<sup><a id="n4002033" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002033">33</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:23</span> He told them, “You will drink my cup,<sup><a id="n4002034" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002034">34</a></sup> but to sit at my right and at my left is not mine to give. Rather, it is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:24</span> Now<sup><a id="n4002035" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002035">35</a></sup> when the other ten<sup><a id="n4002036" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002036">36</a></sup> heard this,<sup><a id="n4002037" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002037">37</a></sup> they were angry with the two brothers. <span class="verse">20:25</span> But Jesus called them and said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those in high positions use their authority over them. <span class="verse">20:26</span> It must not be this way among you! Instead whoever wants to be great among you must be your servant, <span class="verse">20:27</span> and whoever wants to be first among you must be your slave<sup><a id="n4002038" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002038">38</a></sup> — <span class="verse">20:28</span> just as the Son of Man did not come to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom<sup><a id="n4002039" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002039">39</a></sup> for many.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Two Blind Men Healed </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:29</span> As they were leaving Jericho, a large crowd followed them. <span class="verse">20:30</span> Two<sup><a id="n4002041" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002041">41</a></sup> blind men were sitting by the road. When they heard that Jesus was passing by, they shouted,<sup><a id="n4002042" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002042">42</a></sup> “Have mercy<sup><a id="n4002043" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002043">43</a></sup> on us, Lord, Son of David!”<sup><a id="n4002044" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002044">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:31</span> The<sup><a id="n4002045" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002045">45</a></sup> crowd scolded<sup><a id="n4002046" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002046">46</a></sup> them to get them to be quiet. But they shouted even more loudly, “Lord, have mercy on us,<sup><a id="n4002047" href="file989_notes.xhtml#n4002047">47</a></sup> Son of David!” <span class="verse">20:32</span> Jesus stopped, called them, and said, “What do you want me to do for you?” <span class="verse">20:33</span> They said to him, “Lord, let our eyes be opened.” <span class="verse">20:34</span> Moved with compassion, Jesus touched their eyes. Immediately they received their sight and followed him. </p>

</body>
</html>