<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 18</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 18</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Questions About the Greatest</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:1</span> At that time the disciples came to Jesus saying, “Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” <span class="verse">18:2</span> He called a child, had him stand among them, <span class="verse">18:3</span> and said, “I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n400181" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n400181">1</a></sup> unless you turn around and become like little children,<sup><a id="n400182" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n400182">2</a></sup> you will never<sup><a id="n400183" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n400183">3</a></sup> enter the kingdom of heaven! <span class="verse">18:4</span> Whoever then humbles himself like this little child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. <span class="verse">18:5</span> And whoever welcomes<sup><a id="n400184" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n400184">4</a></sup> a child like this in my name welcomes me. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:6</span> “But if anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin,<sup><a id="n400185" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n400185">5</a></sup> it would be better for him to have a huge millstone<sup><a id="n400186" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n400186">6</a></sup> hung around his neck and to be drowned in the open sea.<sup><a id="n400187" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n400187">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">18:7</span> Woe to the world because of stumbling blocks! It<sup><a id="n400188" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n400188">8</a></sup> is necessary that stumbling blocks come, but woe to the person through whom they come. <span class="verse">18:8</span> If<sup><a id="n400189" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n400189">9</a></sup> your hand or your foot causes you to sin,<sup><a id="n4001810" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001810">10</a></sup> cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to enter life crippled or lame than to have<sup><a id="n4001811" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001811">11</a></sup> two hands or two feet and be thrown into eternal fire. <span class="verse">18:9</span> And if your eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away. It is better for you to enter into life with one eye than to have<sup><a id="n4001812" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001812">12</a></sup> two eyes and be thrown into fiery hell.<sup><a id="n4001813" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001813">13</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Lost Sheep </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:10</span> “See that you do not disdain one of these little ones. For I tell you that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father in heaven.<sup><a id="n4001814" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001814">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">18:12</span> What do you think? If someone<sup><a id="n4001815" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001815">15</a></sup> owns a hundred<sup><a id="n4001816" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001816">16</a></sup> sheep and one of them goes astray, will he not leave the ninety-nine on the mountains and go look for the one that went astray?<sup><a id="n4001817" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001817">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">18:13</span> And if he finds it, I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4001818" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001818">18</a></sup> he will rejoice more over it than over the ninety-nine that did not go astray. <span class="verse">18:14</span> In the same way, your Father in heaven is not willing that one of these little ones be lost. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Restoring Christian Relationships</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:15</span> “If<sup><a id="n4001819" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001819">19</a></sup> your brother<sup><a id="n4001820" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001820">20</a></sup> sins,<sup><a id="n4001821" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001821">21</a></sup> go and show him his fault<sup><a id="n4001822" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001822">22</a></sup> when the two of you are alone. If he listens to you, you have regained your brother. <span class="verse">18:16</span> But if he does not listen, take one or two others with you, so that <b><i>at</i></b> <b><i>the testimony of two or three witnesses every matter may be established</i></b>.<sup><a id="n4001823" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001823">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">18:17</span> If<sup><a id="n4001824" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001824">24</a></sup> he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the church. If<sup><a id="n4001825" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001825">25</a></sup> he refuses to listen to the church, treat him like<sup><a id="n4001826" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001826">26</a></sup> a Gentile<sup><a id="n4001827" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001827">27</a></sup> or a tax collector.<sup><a id="n4001828" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001828">28</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:18</span> “I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4001829" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001829">29</a></sup> whatever you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven, and whatever you release on earth will have been released in heaven. <span class="verse">18:19</span> Again, I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4001830" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001830">30</a></sup> if two of you on earth agree about whatever you ask, my Father in heaven will do it for you.<sup><a id="n4001831" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001831">31</a></sup> <span class="verse">18:20</span> For where two or three are assembled in my name, I am there among them.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:21</span> Then Peter came to him and said, “Lord, how many times must I forgive my brother<sup><a id="n4001832" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001832">32</a></sup> who sins against me? As many as seven times?” <span class="verse">18:22</span> Jesus said to him, “Not seven times, I tell you, but seventy-seven times!<sup><a id="n4001833" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001833">33</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Unforgiving Slave</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">18:23</span> “For this reason, the kingdom of heaven is like a king who wanted to settle accounts with his slaves.<sup><a id="n4001834" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001834">34</a></sup> <span class="verse">18:24</span> As<sup><a id="n4001835" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001835">35</a></sup> he began settling his accounts, a man who owed 10,000 talents<sup><a id="n4001836" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001836">36</a></sup> was brought to him. <span class="verse">18:25</span> Because<sup><a id="n4001837" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001837">37</a></sup> he was not able to repay it,<sup><a id="n4001838" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001838">38</a></sup> the lord ordered him to be sold, along with<sup><a id="n4001839" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001839">39</a></sup> his wife, children, and whatever he possessed, and repayment to be made. <span class="verse">18:26</span> Then the slave threw himself to the ground<sup><a id="n4001840" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001840">40</a></sup> before him, saying,<sup><a id="n4001841" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001841">41</a></sup> ‘Be patient with me, and I will repay you everything.’ <span class="verse">18:27</span> The lord had compassion on that slave and released him, and forgave him the debt. <span class="verse">18:28</span> After<sup><a id="n4001842" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001842">42</a></sup> he went out, that same slave found one of his fellow slaves who owed him 100 silver coins.<sup><a id="n4001843" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001843">43</a></sup> So<sup><a id="n4001844" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001844">44</a></sup> he grabbed him by the throat and started to choke him,<sup><a id="n4001845" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001845">45</a></sup> saying, ‘Pay back what you owe me!’<sup><a id="n4001846" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001846">46</a></sup> <span class="verse">18:29</span> Then his fellow slave threw himself down and begged him,<sup><a id="n4001847" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001847">47</a></sup> ‘Be patient with me, and I will repay you.’ <span class="verse">18:30</span> But he refused. Instead, he went out and threw him in prison until he repaid the debt. <span class="verse">18:31</span> When<sup><a id="n4001848" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001848">48</a></sup> his fellow slaves saw what had happened, they were very upset and went and told their lord everything that had taken place. <span class="verse">18:32</span> Then his lord called the first slave<sup><a id="n4001849" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001849">49</a></sup> and said to him, ‘Evil slave! I forgave you all that debt because you begged me! <span class="verse">18:33</span> Should you not have shown mercy to your fellow slave, just as I showed it to you?’ <span class="verse">18:34</span> And in anger his lord turned him over to the prison guards to torture him<sup><a id="n4001850" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001850">50</a></sup> until he repaid all he owed. <span class="verse">18:35</span> So also my heavenly Father will do to you, if each of you does not forgive your<sup><a id="n4001851" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001851">51</a></sup> brother<sup><a id="n4001852" href="file987_notes.xhtml#n4001852">52</a></sup> from your heart.” </p>

</body>
</html>