<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Corinthians 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Corinthians<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Why Paul Postponed His Visit</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:23</span> Now I appeal to God as my witness,<sup><a id="n4700142" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700142">42</a></sup> that to spare<sup><a id="n4700143" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700143">43</a></sup> you I did not come again to Corinth.<sup><a id="n4700144" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700144">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:24</span> I do not mean that we rule over your faith, but we are workers with you for your joy, because by faith you stand firm.<sup><a id="n4700145" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700145">45</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:1</span> So<sup><a id="n470021" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n470021">1</a></sup> I made up my own mind<sup><a id="n470022" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n470022">2</a></sup> not to pay you another painful visit.<sup><a id="n470023" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n470023">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:2</span> For if I make you sad, who would be left to make me glad<sup><a id="n470024" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n470024">4</a></sup> but the one I caused to be sad? <span class="verse">2:3</span> And I wrote this very thing to you,<sup><a id="n470025" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n470025">5</a></sup> so that when I came<sup><a id="n470026" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n470026">6</a></sup> I would not have sadness from those who ought to make me rejoice, since I am confident in you all that my joy would be yours. <span class="verse">2:4</span> For out of great distress and anguish of heart I wrote to you with many tears, not to make you sad, but to let you know the love that I have especially for you.<sup><a id="n470027" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n470027">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:5</span> But if anyone has caused sadness, he has not saddened me alone, but to some extent (not to exaggerate)<sup><a id="n470028" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n470028">8</a></sup> he has saddened all of you as well. <span class="verse">2:6</span> This punishment on such an individual by the majority is enough for him, <span class="verse">2:7</span> so that now instead<sup><a id="n470029" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n470029">9</a></sup> you should rather forgive and comfort him.<sup><a id="n4700210" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700210">10</a></sup> This will keep him from being overwhelmed by excessive grief to the point of despair.<sup><a id="n4700211" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700211">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:8</span> Therefore I urge you to reaffirm your love for him.<sup><a id="n4700212" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700212">12</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:9</span> For this reason also I wrote you:<sup><a id="n4700213" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700213">13</a></sup> to test you to see<sup><a id="n4700214" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700214">14</a></sup> if you are obedient in everything. <span class="verse">2:10</span> If you forgive anyone for anything, I also forgive him—for indeed what I have forgiven (if I have forgiven anything) I did so for you in the presence of Christ, <span class="verse">2:11</span> so that we may not be exploited<sup><a id="n4700215" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700215">15</a></sup> by Satan (for we are not ignorant of his schemes). <span class="verse">2:12</span> Now when I arrived in Troas<sup><a id="n4700216" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700216">16</a></sup> to proclaim the gospel of Christ, even though the Lord had opened<sup><a id="n4700217" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700217">17</a></sup> a door of opportunity<sup><a id="n4700218" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700218">18</a></sup> for me, <span class="verse">2:13</span> I had no relief in my spirit,<sup><a id="n4700219" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700219">19</a></sup> because I did not find my brother Titus there. So I said goodbye to them<sup><a id="n4700220" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700220">20</a></sup> and set out<sup><a id="n4700221" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700221">21</a></sup> for Macedonia. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Apostolic Ministry</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:14</span> But thanks be to God who always leads us in triumphal procession<sup><a id="n4700222" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700222">22</a></sup> in Christ<sup><a id="n4700223" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700223">23</a></sup> and who makes known<sup><a id="n4700224" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700224">24</a></sup> through us the fragrance that consists of the knowledge of him in every place. <span class="verse">2:15</span> For we are a sweet aroma of Christ to God among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing— <span class="verse">2:16</span> to the latter an odor<sup><a id="n4700225" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700225">25</a></sup> from death to death, but to the former a fragrance from life to life. And who is adequate for these things?<sup><a id="n4700226" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700226">26</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:17</span> For we are not like so many others, hucksters who peddle the word of God for profit,<sup><a id="n4700227" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700227">27</a></sup> but we are speaking in Christ before<sup><a id="n4700228" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700228">28</a></sup> God as persons of sincerity,<sup><a id="n4700229" href="file1127_notes.xhtml#n4700229">29</a></sup> as persons sent from God. </p>

</body>
</html>