<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for James 1</h2>
<p id="n590011"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n590011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “James.” The word “From” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n590012"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n590012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “servant” or “bondservant.” Though <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) is normally translated “servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. Also, many slaves in the Roman world became slaves through Rome’s subjugation of conquered nations, kidnapping, or by being born into slave households. </p><p><b>sn</b> Undoubtedly the background for the concept of being the Lord’s slave or servant is to be found in the Old Testament scriptures. For a Jew this concept did not connote drudgery, but honor and privilege. It was used of national Israel at times (Isa 43:10), but was especially associated with famous OT personalities, including such great men as Moses (Josh 14:7), David (Ps 89:3; cf. 2 Sam 7:5, 8) and Elijah (2 Kgs 10:10); all these men were “servants (or slaves) of the Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n590013"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n590013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the twelve tribes in the Diaspora.” The Greek term <span class="greek">διασπορά</span> (<span class="translit">diaspora</span>, “dispersion”) refers to Jews not living in Palestine but “dispersed” or scattered among the Gentiles.</p></p>
<p id="n590014"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n590014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” or “fellow Christians” as here (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited). Where the plural term is used in direct address, as here, “brothers and sisters” is used; where the term is singular and not direct address (as in v. 9), “believer” is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n590015"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n590015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all joy,” “full joy,” or “greatest joy.”</p></p>
<p id="n590016"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n590016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a man of two minds,” continuing the description of the person in v. 7, giving the reason that he cannot expect to receive anything. The word for “man” or “individual” is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which often means “male” or “man (as opposed to woman).” But it sometimes is used generically to mean “anyone,” “a person,” as here (cf. BDAG 79 s.v. 2).</p><p><b>sn</b> A <i>double-minded man</i> is one whose devotion to God is less than total. His attention is divided between God and other things, and as a consequence he is unstable and therefore unable to receive from God.</p></p>
<p id="n590017"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n590017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brother.” Here the term “brother” means “fellow believer” or “fellow Christian” (cf. TEV, NLT “Christians”; CEV “God’s people”). The term broadly connotes familial relationships within the family of God (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 2.a).</p></p>
<p id="n590018"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n590018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the lowly brother,” but “lowly/humble” is clarified in context by the contrast with “wealthy” in v. 10.</p></p>
<p id="n590019"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n590019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let him boast.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900110"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his height,” “his exaltation.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900111"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a flower of grass.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900112"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “perishes,” “is destroyed.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900113"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word for “man” or “individual” here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which often means “male” or “man (as opposed to woman).” However, as BDAG 79 s.v. 2 says, here it is “equivalent to <span class="greek">τὶς</span> <i>someone, a person</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900114"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900114">14</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> ([C] P 0246 5 436 442 1611 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) <i>al</i> read <span class="greek">ὁ κύριος</span> (<span class="translit">ho kurios</span>, “the Lord”) here, while others have <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span> (<span class="translit">ho theos</span>, “God”; 4 33<sup>vid</sup> 323 945 1175 1243 1735 1739 1852 2492 <i>al</i>). However, several significant and early witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 81 2344 co) have no explicit subject. In light of the scribal tendency toward clarification, and the fact that both <span class="greek">κύριος</span> and <span class="greek">θεός</span> are well represented, there can be little doubt that the original text had no explicit subject. The referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity, not because of textual basis.</p></p>
<p id="n5900115"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “God must not be tested by evil people.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900116"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5900117"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The first phrase refers to the action of giving and the second to what is given.</p></p>
<p id="n5900118"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “All generous giving and every perfect gift from above is coming down.” </p></p>
<p id="n5900119"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “variation or shadow of turning” (referring to the motions of heavenly bodies causing variations of light and darkness).</p></p>
<p id="n5900120"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Having willed, he gave us birth.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900121"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5900122"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word translated “human” here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which often means “male” or “man (as opposed to woman).” But it sometimes is used generically to mean “anyone,” “a person” (cf. BDAG 79 s.v. 2), and in this context, contrasted with “God’s righteousness,” the point is “human” anger (not exclusively “male” anger).</p></p>
<p id="n5900123"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900123">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>God’s righteousness</i> could refer to (1) God’s righteous standard, (2) the righteousness God gives, (3) righteousness before God, or (4) God’s eschatological righteousness (see P. H. Davids, <i>James</i> [NIGTC], 93, for discussion).</p></p>
<p id="n5900124"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with meekness.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900125"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word for “man” or “individual” is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which often means “male” or “man (as opposed to woman).” However, as BDAG 79 s.v. 2 says, here it is “equivalent to <span class="greek">τὶς</span> <i>someone, a person</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900126"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the face of his beginning [or origin].”</p></p>
<p id="n5900127"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he has gone out and immediately has forgotten.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900128"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “continues.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900129"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900130"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in his doing.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900131"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the sight of”; <i>Grk</i> “with.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900132"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the God and Father.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900133"><a href="file1206.xhtml#n5900133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “affliction.” BDAG 457 s.v. 1 has “difficult circumstances” for this specific context, but since this is somewhat lengthy, “adversity” was preferred instead.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
