<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 James 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>James<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From James,<sup><a id="n590011" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n590011">1</a></sup> a slave<sup><a id="n590012" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n590012">2</a></sup> of God and the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes dispersed abroad.<sup><a id="n590013" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n590013">3</a></sup> Greetings! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Joy in Trials</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:2</span> My brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n590014" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n590014">4</a></sup> consider it nothing but joy<sup><a id="n590015" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n590015">5</a></sup> when you fall into all sorts of trials, <span class="verse">1:3</span> because you know that the testing of your faith produces endurance. <span class="verse">1:4</span> And let endurance have its perfect effect, so that you will be perfect and complete, not deficient in anything. <span class="verse">1:5</span> But if anyone is deficient in wisdom, he should ask God, who gives to all generously and without reprimand, and it will be given to him. <span class="verse">1:6</span> But he must ask in faith without doubting, for the one who doubts is like a wave of the sea, blown and tossed around by the wind. <span class="verse">1:7</span> For that person must not suppose that he will receive anything from the Lord, <span class="verse">1:8</span> since he is a double-minded individual,<sup><a id="n590016" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n590016">6</a></sup> unstable in all his ways. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:9</span> Now the believer<sup><a id="n590017" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n590017">7</a></sup> of humble means<sup><a id="n590018" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n590018">8</a></sup> should take pride<sup><a id="n590019" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n590019">9</a></sup> in his high position.<sup><a id="n5900110" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900110">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:10</span> But the rich person’s pride should be in his humiliation, because he will pass away like a wildflower in the meadow.<sup><a id="n5900111" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900111">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:11</span> For the sun rises with its heat and dries up the meadow; the petal of the flower falls off and its beauty is lost forever.<sup><a id="n5900112" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900112">12</a></sup> So also the rich person in the midst of his pursuits will wither away. <span class="verse">1:12</span> Happy is the one<sup><a id="n5900113" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900113">13</a></sup> who endures testing, because when he has proven to be genuine, he will receive the crown of life that God<sup><a id="n5900114" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900114">14</a></sup> promised to those who love him. <span class="verse">1:13</span> Let no one say when he is tempted, “I am tempted by God,” for God cannot be tempted by evil,<sup><a id="n5900115" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900115">15</a></sup> and he himself tempts no one. <span class="verse">1:14</span> But each one is tempted when he is lured and enticed by his own desires. <span class="verse">1:15</span> Then when desire conceives, it gives birth to sin, and when sin is full grown, it gives birth to death. <span class="verse">1:16</span> Do not be led astray, my dear brothers and sisters.<sup><a id="n5900116" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900116">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:17</span> All generous giving and every perfect gift<sup><a id="n5900117" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900117">17</a></sup> is from above, coming down<sup><a id="n5900118" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900118">18</a></sup> from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or the slightest hint of change.<sup><a id="n5900119" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900119">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:18</span> By his sovereign plan he gave us birth<sup><a id="n5900120" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900120">20</a></sup> through the message of truth, that we would be a kind of firstfruits of all he created. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Living Out the Message</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:19</span> Understand this, my dear brothers and sisters!<sup><a id="n5900121" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900121">21</a></sup> Let every person be quick to listen, slow to speak, slow to anger. <span class="verse">1:20</span> For human<sup><a id="n5900122" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900122">22</a></sup> anger does not accomplish God’s righteousness.<sup><a id="n5900123" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900123">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:21</span> So put away all filth and evil excess and humbly<sup><a id="n5900124" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900124">24</a></sup> welcome the message implanted within you, which is able to save your souls. <span class="verse">1:22</span> But be sure you live out the message and do not merely listen to it and so deceive yourselves. <span class="verse">1:23</span> For if someone merely listens to the message and does not live it out, he is like someone<sup><a id="n5900125" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900125">25</a></sup> who gazes at his own face<sup><a id="n5900126" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900126">26</a></sup> in a mirror. <span class="verse">1:24</span> For he gazes at himself and then goes out and immediately forgets<sup><a id="n5900127" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900127">27</a></sup> what sort of person he was. <span class="verse">1:25</span> But the one who peers into the perfect law of liberty and fixes his attention there,<sup><a id="n5900128" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900128">28</a></sup> and does not become a forgetful listener but one who lives it out—he<sup><a id="n5900129" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900129">29</a></sup> will be blessed in what he does.<sup><a id="n5900130" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900130">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:26</span> If someone thinks he is religious yet does not bridle his tongue, and so deceives his heart, his religion is futile. <span class="verse">1:27</span> Pure and undefiled religion before<sup><a id="n5900131" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900131">31</a></sup> God the Father<sup><a id="n5900132" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900132">32</a></sup> is this: to care for orphans and widows in their adversity<sup><a id="n5900133" href="file1206_notes.xhtml#n5900133">33</a></sup> and to keep oneself unstained by the world. </p>

</body>
</html>