<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Timothy 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Timothy<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul,<sup><a id="n550011" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n550011">1</a></sup> an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to further the promise<sup><a id="n550012" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n550012">2</a></sup> of life in Christ Jesus, <span class="verse">1:2</span> to Timothy, my dear child. Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Thanksgiving and Charge to Timothy</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:3</span> I am thankful to God, whom I have served with a clear conscience as my ancestors did,<sup><a id="n550013" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n550013">3</a></sup> when I remember you in my prayers as I do constantly night and day.<sup><a id="n550014" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n550014">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:4</span> As I remember your tears, I long to see you,<sup><a id="n550015" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n550015">5</a></sup> so that I may be filled with joy. <span class="verse">1:5</span> I recall<sup><a id="n550016" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n550016">6</a></sup> your sincere faith<sup><a id="n550017" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n550017">7</a></sup> that was alive first in your grandmother Lois and in your mother Eunice, and I am sure<sup><a id="n550018" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n550018">8</a></sup> is in you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:6</span> Because of this I remind you to rekindle God’s gift that you possess<sup><a id="n550019" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n550019">9</a></sup> through the laying on of my hands. <span class="verse">1:7</span> For God did not give us a Spirit<sup><a id="n5500110" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500110">10</a></sup> of fear but of power and love and self-control. <span class="verse">1:8</span> So do not be ashamed of the testimony about our Lord<sup><a id="n5500111" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500111">11</a></sup> or of me, a prisoner for his sake, but by<sup><a id="n5500112" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500112">12</a></sup> God’s power accept your share of suffering<sup><a id="n5500113" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500113">13</a></sup> for the gospel. <span class="verse">1:9</span> He is the one who saved us<sup><a id="n5500114" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500114">14</a></sup> and called us with a holy calling, not based on<sup><a id="n5500115" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500115">15</a></sup> our works but on his own purpose and grace, granted to us in Christ Jesus before time began,<sup><a id="n5500116" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500116">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:10</span> but now made visible through the appearing of our Savior Christ Jesus. He<sup><a id="n5500117" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500117">17</a></sup> has broken the power of death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel! <span class="verse">1:11</span> For this gospel<sup><a id="n5500118" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500118">18</a></sup> I was appointed a preacher and apostle and teacher.<sup><a id="n5500119" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500119">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:12</span> Because of this, in fact, I suffer as I do.<sup><a id="n5500120" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500120">20</a></sup> But I am not ashamed, because I know the one in whom my faith is set<sup><a id="n5500121" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500121">21</a></sup> and I am convinced that he is able to protect what has been entrusted to me<sup><a id="n5500122" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500122">22</a></sup> until that day.<sup><a id="n5500123" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500123">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:13</span> Hold to the standard<sup><a id="n5500124" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500124">24</a></sup> of sound words that you heard from me and do so with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.<sup><a id="n5500125" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500125">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:14</span> Protect that good thing<sup><a id="n5500126" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500126">26</a></sup> entrusted to you, through the Holy Spirit who lives within us. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:15</span> You know that everyone in the province of Asia<sup><a id="n5500127" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500127">27</a></sup> deserted me, including Phygelus and Hermogenes. <span class="verse">1:16</span> May the Lord grant mercy to the family of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my imprisonment.<sup><a id="n5500128" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500128">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:17</span> But when he arrived in Rome, he eagerly searched for me and found me. <span class="verse">1:18</span> May the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord on that day!<sup><a id="n5500130" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500130">30</a></sup> And you know very well all the ways he served me in Ephesus.<sup><a id="n5500131" href="file1181_notes.xhtml#n5500131">31</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>