<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Lord of the Sabbath </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> At that time Jesus went through the grain fields on a Sabbath. His<sup><a id="n400121" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n400121">1</a></sup> disciples were hungry, and they began to pick heads of wheat<sup><a id="n400122" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n400122">2</a></sup> and eat them. <span class="verse">12:2</span> But when the Pharisees<sup><a id="n400123" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n400123">3</a></sup> saw this they said to him, “Look, your disciples are doing what is against the law to do on the Sabbath.” <span class="verse">12:3</span> He<sup><a id="n400124" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n400124">4</a></sup> said to them, “Haven’t you read what David did when he and his companions were hungry— <span class="verse">12:4</span> how he entered the house of God and ate<sup><a id="n400125" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n400125">5</a></sup> the sacred bread,<sup><a id="n400126" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n400126">6</a></sup> which was against the law<sup><a id="n400127" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n400127">7</a></sup> for him or his companions to eat, but only for the priests?<sup><a id="n400128" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n400128">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:5</span> Or have you not read in the law that the priests in the temple desecrate the Sabbath and yet are not guilty? <span class="verse">12:6</span> I<sup><a id="n400129" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n400129">9</a></sup> tell you that something greater than the temple is here. <span class="verse">12:7</span> If<sup><a id="n4001210" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001210">10</a></sup> you had known what this means: ‘<b><i>I want mercy and not sacrifice</i></b>,’<sup><a id="n4001211" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001211">11</a></sup> you would not have condemned the innocent. <span class="verse">12:8</span> For the Son of Man is lord<sup><a id="n4001212" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001212">12</a></sup> of the Sabbath.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:9</span> Then<sup><a id="n4001213" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001213">13</a></sup> Jesus<sup><a id="n4001214" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001214">14</a></sup> left that place and entered their synagogue.<sup><a id="n4001215" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001215">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:10</span> A<sup><a id="n4001216" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001216">16</a></sup> man was there who had a withered<sup><a id="n4001217" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001217">17</a></sup> hand. And they asked Jesus,<sup><a id="n4001218" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001218">18</a></sup> “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?”<sup><a id="n4001219" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001219">19</a></sup> so that they could accuse him. <span class="verse">12:11</span> He said to them, “Would not any one of you, if he had one sheep that fell into a pit on the Sabbath, take hold of it and lift it out? <span class="verse">12:12</span> How much more valuable is a person than a sheep! So it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath.” <span class="verse">12:13</span> Then he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” He stretched it out and it was restored,<sup><a id="n4001220" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001220">20</a></sup> as healthy as the other. <span class="verse">12:14</span> But the Pharisees went out and plotted against him, as to how they could assassinate<sup><a id="n4001221" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001221">21</a></sup> him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s Special Servant</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:15</span> Now when Jesus learned of this, he went away from there. Great<sup><a id="n4001222" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001222">22</a></sup> crowds<sup><a id="n4001223" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001223">23</a></sup> followed him, and he healed them all. <span class="verse">12:16</span> But he sternly warned them not to make him known. <span class="verse">12:17</span> This fulfilled what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah:<sup><a id="n4001224" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001224">24</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">12:18</span> “<b><i>Here is</i></b><sup><a id="n4001225" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001225">25</a></sup> <b><i>my</i> <i>servant whom I have chosen,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>the one I love, in whom I take great delight</b></i>.<sup><a id="n4001226" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001226">26</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>I will put my Spirit on him, and he will proclaim justice to the nations</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">12:19</span> <b><i>He will not quarrel or cry out,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets</b></i>.</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">12:20</span> <b><i>He will not break a bruised reed or extinguish a smoldering wick,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>until he brings justice to victory</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">12:21</span> <b><i>And in his name the Gentiles</i></b><sup><a id="n4001227" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001227">27</a></sup> <i><b>will hope</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4001228" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001228">28</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus and Beelzebul </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:22</span> Then they brought to him a demon-possessed man who was blind and mute. Jesus<sup><a id="n4001229" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001229">29</a></sup> healed him so that he could speak and see.<sup><a id="n4001230" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001230">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:23</span> All the crowds were amazed and said, “Could this one be the Son of David?” <span class="verse">12:24</span> But when the Pharisees<sup><a id="n4001231" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001231">31</a></sup> heard this they said, “He does not cast out demons except by the power of Beelzebul,<sup><a id="n4001232" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001232">32</a></sup> the ruler<sup><a id="n4001233" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001233">33</a></sup> of demons!” <span class="verse">12:25</span> Now when Jesus<sup><a id="n4001234" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001234">34</a></sup> realized what they were thinking, he said to them,<sup><a id="n4001235" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001235">35</a></sup> “Every kingdom divided against itself is destroyed,<sup><a id="n4001236" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001236">36</a></sup> and no town or house divided against itself will stand. <span class="verse">12:26</span> So if<sup><a id="n4001237" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001237">37</a></sup> Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand? <span class="verse">12:27</span> And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons<sup><a id="n4001238" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001238">38</a></sup> cast them<sup><a id="n4001239" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001239">39</a></sup> out? For this reason they will be your judges. <span class="verse">12:28</span> But if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God<sup><a id="n4001240" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001240">40</a></sup> has already overtaken<sup><a id="n4001241" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001241">41</a></sup> you. <span class="verse">12:29</span> How<sup><a id="n4001242" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001242">42</a></sup> else can someone enter a strong man’s<sup><a id="n4001243" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001243">43</a></sup> house and steal his property, unless he first ties up the strong man? Then he can thoroughly plunder the house.<sup><a id="n4001244" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001244">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:30</span> Whoever is not with me is against me,<sup><a id="n4001245" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001245">45</a></sup> and whoever does not gather with me scatters.<sup><a id="n4001246" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001246">46</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:31</span> For this reason I tell you, people will be forgiven for every sin and blasphemy,<sup><a id="n4001247" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001247">47</a></sup> but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven. <span class="verse">12:32</span> Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven.<sup><a id="n4001248" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001248">48</a></sup> But whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven,<sup><a id="n4001249" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001249">49</a></sup> either in this age or in the age to come. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Trees and Their Fruit</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:33</span> “Make a tree good and its fruit will be good, or make a tree bad<sup><a id="n4001250" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001250">50</a></sup> and its fruit will be bad, for a tree is known by its fruit. <span class="verse">12:34</span> Offspring of vipers! How are you able to say anything good, since you are evil? For the mouth speaks from what fills the heart. <span class="verse">12:35</span> The good person<sup><a id="n4001251" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001251">51</a></sup> brings good things out of his<sup><a id="n4001252" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001252">52</a></sup> good treasury,<sup><a id="n4001253" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001253">53</a></sup> and the evil person brings evil things out of his evil treasury. <span class="verse">12:36</span> I<sup><a id="n4001254" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001254">54</a></sup> tell you that on the day of judgment, people will give an account for every worthless word they speak. <span class="verse">12:37</span> For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Sign of Jonah </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:38</span> Then some of the experts in the law<sup><a id="n4001255" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001255">55</a></sup> along with some Pharisees<sup><a id="n4001256" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001256">56</a></sup> answered him,<sup><a id="n4001257" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001257">57</a></sup> “Teacher, we want to see a sign<sup><a id="n4001258" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001258">58</a></sup> from you.” <span class="verse">12:39</span> But he answered them,<sup><a id="n4001259" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001259">59</a></sup> “An evil and adulterous generation asks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah. <span class="verse">12:40</span> For just as Jonah was <b><i>in</i></b> <b><i>the belly of the huge fish</i></b><sup><a id="n4001260" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001260">60</a></sup> <i><b>for three days and three nights</b></i>,<sup><a id="n4001261" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001261">61</a></sup> so the Son of Man will be in the heart of the earth for three days and three nights. <span class="verse">12:41</span> The people<sup><a id="n4001262" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001262">62</a></sup> of Nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because they repented when Jonah preached to them<sup><a id="n4001263" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001263">63</a></sup> —and now,<sup><a id="n4001264" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001264">64</a></sup> something greater than Jonah is here! <span class="verse">12:42</span> The queen of the South<sup><a id="n4001265" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001265">65</a></sup> will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon—and now,<sup><a id="n4001266" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001266">66</a></sup> something greater than Solomon is here! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Return of the Unclean Spirit </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:43</span> “When<sup><a id="n4001267" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001267">67</a></sup> an unclean spirit<sup><a id="n4001268" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001268">68</a></sup> goes out of a person,<sup><a id="n4001269" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001269">69</a></sup> it passes through waterless places<sup><a id="n4001270" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001270">70</a></sup> looking for rest but<sup><a id="n4001271" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001271">71</a></sup> does not find it. <span class="verse">12:44</span> Then it says, ‘I will return to the home I left.’<sup><a id="n4001272" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001272">72</a></sup> When it returns,<sup><a id="n4001273" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001273">73</a></sup> it finds the house<sup><a id="n4001274" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001274">74</a></sup> empty, swept clean, and put in order.<sup><a id="n4001275" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001275">75</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:45</span> Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they go in and live there, so<sup><a id="n4001276" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001276">76</a></sup> the last state of that person is worse than the first. It will be that way for this evil generation as well!”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ True Family </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:46</span> While Jesus<sup><a id="n4001277" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001277">77</a></sup> was still speaking to the crowds,<sup><a id="n4001278" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001278">78</a></sup> his mother and brothers<sup><a id="n4001279" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001279">79</a></sup> came and stood outside, asking<sup><a id="n4001280" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001280">80</a></sup> to speak to him. <span class="verse">12:47</span> <sup><a id="n4001281" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001281">81</a></sup> Someone<sup><a id="n4001282" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001282">82</a></sup> told him, “Look, your mother and your brothers are standing outside wanting<sup><a id="n4001283" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001283">83</a></sup> to speak to you.” <span class="verse">12:48</span> To the one who had said this, Jesus<sup><a id="n4001284" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001284">84</a></sup> replied,<sup><a id="n4001285" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001285">85</a></sup> “Who is my mother and who are my brothers?” <span class="verse">12:49</span> And pointing<sup><a id="n4001286" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001286">86</a></sup> toward his disciples he said, “Here<sup><a id="n4001287" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001287">87</a></sup> are my mother and my brothers! <span class="verse">12:50</span> For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is<sup><a id="n4001288" href="file981_notes.xhtml#n4001288">88</a></sup> my brother and sister and mother.” </p>

</body>
</html>