<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 8</h2>
<p id="n660081"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n660081">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the resumption of the topic of the seals.</p></p>
<p id="n660082"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n660082">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the Lamb) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n660083"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n660083">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660084"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n660084">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n660085"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n660085">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having.”</p></p>
<p id="n660086"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n660086">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>golden censer</i> was a bowl in which incense was burned. The imagery suggests the OT role of the priest.</p></p>
<p id="n660087"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n660087">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb “to station” was used to translate <span class="greek">ἑστάθη</span> (<span class="translit">hestathē</span>) because it connotes the idea of purposeful arrangement in English, which seems to be the idea in the Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n660088"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n660088">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n660089"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n660089">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600810"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600810">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression <span class="greek">τῶν θυμιαμάτων</span> (<span class="translit">tōn thumiamatōn</span>) is taken as a “genitive of producer,” i.e., the noun in the genitive produces the head noun.</p></p>
<p id="n6600811"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600811">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600812"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600812">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sounds,” “voices.” It is not entirely clear what this refers to. BDAG 1071 s.v. <span class="greek">φωνή</span> 1 states, “In Rv we have <span class="greek">ἀστραπαὶ καὶ φωναὶ καὶ βρονταί</span> (cp. Ex 19:16) 4:5; 8:5; 11:19; 16:18 (are certain other sounds in nature thought of here in addition to thunder, as e.g. the roar of the storm?…).”</p></p>
<p id="n6600813"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600813">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n6600814"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600814">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600815"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600816"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600816">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so that” because what follows has the logical force of a result clause.</p></p>
<p id="n6600817"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600817">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600818"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600818">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600819"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600819">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a third of the living creatures in the sea”; <i>Grk</i> “the third of the creatures which were in the sea, the ones having life.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600820"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600820">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term translated “completely destroyed,” L&amp;N 20.40 states, “to cause the complete destruction of someone or something—‘to destroy utterly.’ <span class="greek">τὸ τρίτον τῶν πλοίων διεφθάρησαν</span> ‘a third of the ships were completely destroyed’ Re 8:9.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600821"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600821">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600822"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600822">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from heaven” (the same Greek word means both “heaven” and “sky”).</p></p>
<p id="n6600823"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600823">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fell.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600824"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600824">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” in keeping with the parenthetical nature of this remark.</p></p>
<p id="n6600825"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600825">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is called,” but this is somewhat redundant in contemporary English. </p></p>
<p id="n6600826"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600826">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Wormwood</i> refers to a particularly bitter herb with medicinal value. According to L&amp;N 3.21, “The English term <i>wormwood</i> is derived from the use of the plant as a medicine to kill intestinal worms.” This remark about the star’s name is parenthetical in nature.</p></p>
<p id="n6600827"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600827">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the star falling on the waters.</p></p>
<p id="n6600828"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600828">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, terribly bitter (see the note on “Wormwood” earlier in this verse).</p></p>
<p id="n6600829"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600829">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and many of the men died from these waters because they were bitter.” </p></p>
<p id="n6600830"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600830">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600831"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600831">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the day did not shine [with respect to] the third of it.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600832"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600832">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600833"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600833">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “one eagle.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600834"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600834">34</a> <p><b>tc</b> <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup> reads “angel” (<span class="greek">ἀγγέλου</span>, <span class="translit">angelou</span>) instead of “eagle” (<span class="greek">ἀετοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">aetou</span>), a reading strongly supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A 046 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup> and several versions. On external grounds, <span class="greek">ἀετοῦ</span> is clearly the superior reading. <span class="greek">ἀγγέλου</span> could have arisen inadvertently due to similarities in spelling or sound between <span class="greek">ἀετοῦ</span> and <span class="greek">ἀγγέλου</span>. It may also have been intentional in order to bring this statement in line with 14:6 where an <i>angel</i> is mentioned as the one flying in midair. This seems a more likely reason, strengthened by the facts that the book only mentions eagles two other times (4:7; 12:14). Further, the immediate as well as broad context is replete with references to angels.</p></p>
<p id="n6600835"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600835">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Concerning the word <span class="greek">μεσουράνημα</span> (<span class="translit">mesouranēma</span>), L&amp;N 1.10 states, “a point or region of the sky directly above the earth—‘high in the sky, midpoint in the sky, directly overhead, straight above in the sky.’ <span class="greek">εἶδον</span>,<span class="greek"> καὶ ἤκουσα ἑνὸς ἁετοῦ πετομένου ἐν μεσουρανήματι</span> ‘I looked, and I heard an eagle that was flying overhead in the sky’ Re 8:13.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600836"><a href="file1241.xhtml#n6600836">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about to sound their trumpets,” but this is redundant in English.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
