<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 2</h2>
<p id="n660022"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n660022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “the following” after “write” is supplied to clarify that what follows is the content of what is to be written.</p></p>
<p id="n660023"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n660023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “These things says [the One]…” The expression <span class="greek">τάδε λέγει</span> (<span class="translit">tade legei</span>) occurs eight times in the NT, seven of which are in Rev 2-3. “The pronoun is used to add solemnity to the prophetic utterance that follows.…In classical drama, it was used to introduce a new actor to the scene (Smyth, <i>Greek Grammar</i>, 307 [§1241]). But the <span class="greek">τάδε λέγει</span> formula in the NT derives from the OT, where it was used to introduce a prophetic utterance (BAGD, s.v. <span class="greek">ὅδε</span>, 1)” (<i>ExSyn</i> 328). Thus, the translation “this is the solemn pronouncement of” for <span class="greek">τάδε λέγει</span> is very much in keeping with the OT connotations of this expression.</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>This is the solemn pronouncement of</i> reflects an OT idiom. The LXX has the same Greek phrase (<span class="greek">τάδε λέγει</span>, <span class="translit">tade legei</span>) about 350 times, with nearly 320 of them having “the Lord” (<i>Heb</i> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;יהוה&#8206;</span>, Yahweh) as subject. That the author of Revelation would use such an expression seven times with the risen Christ as the speaker may well imply something of Christ’s sovereignty and deity. Cf. also Acts 21:11 in which the Holy Spirit is the speaker of this expression.</p></p>
<p id="n660024"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n660024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “holds,” but the term (i.e., <span class="greek">κρατῶν</span>, <span class="translit">kratōn</span>) with an accusative object, along with the context, argues for a sense of firmness. (Cf. <i>ExSyn</i> 132.)</p></p>
<p id="n660025"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n660025">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> On seven stars in his right hand see 1:16.</p></p>
<p id="n660026"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n660026">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “lampstands of gold” with the genitive <span class="greek">τῶν χρυσῶν</span> (<span class="translit">tōn chrusōn</span>) translated as an attributive genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n660027"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n660027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the first possessive pronoun <span class="greek">σου</span> (<span class="translit">sou</span>) is connected to <span class="greek">τὰ ἔργα</span> (<span class="translit">ta erga</span>) and the second <span class="greek">σου</span> is connected to <span class="greek">ὑπομονήν</span> (<span class="translit">hupomonēn</span>), semantically <span class="greek">κόπον</span> (<span class="translit">kopon</span>) is also to be understood as belonging to the Ephesian church. The translation reflects this.</p></p>
<p id="n660028"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n660028">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “tolerate” seems to capture the sense of <span class="greek">βαστάσαι</span> (<span class="translit">bastasai</span>) here. BDAG 171 s.v. <span class="greek">βαστάζω</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">β</span> says, “<i>bear, endure</i>…<span class="greek">κακούς</span> Rv 2:2.…<i>bear patiently, put up with:</i> weaknesses of the weak Ro 15:1; cf. IPol 1:2; evil Rv 2:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n660029"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n660029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the participle was broken off from the previous sentence and translated as an indicative verb beginning a new sentence here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6600210"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of this Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the phrase “I am also aware” to link this English sentence back to “I know” at the beginning of v. 2.</p></p>
<p id="n6600211"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word translated “persisted steadfastly” (<span class="greek">ὑπομονή</span>, <span class="translit">hupomonē</span>) is the same one translated “steadfast endurance” in v. 2.</p></p>
<p id="n6600212"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word translated “departed from” (<span class="greek">ἀφίημι</span>, <span class="translit">aphiēmi</span>; L&amp;N 15.48) can actually be used of divorce (L&amp;N 34.78), so the imagery here is very strong.</p></p>
<p id="n6600213"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from where,” but status is in view rather than physical position. On this term BDAG 838 s.v. <span class="greek">πόθεν</span> 1 states, “<i>from what place? from where?</i>…In imagery <span class="greek">μνημόνευε πόθεν πέπτωκες</span> <i>remember from what</i> (state) <i>you have fallen</i> Rv 2:5.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600214"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and do” (a continuation of the previous sentence in the Greek text). For stylistic reasons in English a new sentence was started here in the translation. The repeated mention of repenting at the end of the verse suggests that the intervening material (“do the deeds you did at first”) specifies how the repentance is to be demonstrated.</p></p>
<p id="n6600215"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you did formerly.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600216"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the final clause is somewhat awkward, it is typical of the style of Revelation.</p></p>
<p id="n6600217"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But you do have this.” The words “going for you” are supplied to complete the English idiom; other phrases like “in your favor” (NIV) or “to your credit” (NRSV) could also be supplied.</p></p>
<p id="n6600218"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600218">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>Nicolaitans</i> were a sect that apparently taught that Christians could engage in immoral behavior with impunity. They are also mentioned in 2:15. They are sometimes associated with Nicolaus, one of the seven original deacons in the church in Jerusalem according to Acts 6:5. The early church father Irenaeus connected them to Nicolaus and further described them as an immoral Gnostic sect (<i>Adv. Haer.</i> 1.26.3; 3.11.1). It is unclear however if the association of the Nicolaitans with the Nicolaus of Acts 6:5 is correct as this view may have arisen based on simple name identification rather than a real historical connection. It is also possible that the group adopted the name of Nicolaus to give them credibility (Eusebius, <i>Eccl. Hist</i>. 3.29.1).</p></p>
<p id="n6600219"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression <span class="greek">τὰ ἔργα τῶν Νικολαϊτῶν</span> (<span class="translit">ta erga tōn Nikolaitōn</span>) has been translated as a subjective genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n6600220"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who is victorious”; traditionally, “who overcomes.” The pendent dative is allowed to stand in the English translation because it is characteristic of the author’s style in Revelation. </p></p>
<p id="n6600221"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “grant.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600222"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “stands.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600223"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600223">23</a> <p><b>tc</b> The omission of “my” (<span class="greek">μου</span>, <span class="translit">mou</span>) after “God” (<span class="greek">θεοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">theou</span>) is well attested, supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C and the Andreas of Caesarea group of Byzantine <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup>). Its addition in 1611, the <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup> group, latt, and others, seems to be evidence of a purposeful conforming of the text to 3:2 and the four occurrences of “my God” (<span class="greek">θεοῦ μου</span>) in 3:12.</p></p>
<p id="n6600224"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated due to differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600225"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “the following” after “write” is supplied to clarify that what follows is the content of what is to be written.</p></p>
<p id="n6600226"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “These things says [the One]…” See the note on the phrase “this is the solemn pronouncement of” in 2:1.</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>This is the solemn pronouncement of</i> reflects an OT idiom. See the note on this phrase in 2:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6600227"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present between these two phrases.</p></p>
<p id="n6600228"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “know your suffering.” This could refer to suffering or distress caused by persecution (see L&amp;N 22.2).</p></p>
<p id="n6600229"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of this Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the phrase “I also know” to link this English sentence back to “I know” at the beginning of the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n6600230"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “against you” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n6600231"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600231">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>synagogue</i> was a place for Jewish prayer and worship, with recognized leadership (e.g., Mt 4:23, Mk 1:21, Lk 4:15, Jn 6:59).</p></p>
<p id="n6600232"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is about to throw some of you,” but the force is causative in context.</p></p>
<p id="n6600233"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “tempted.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600234"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “experience persecution,” “will be in distress” (see L&amp;N 22.2).</p></p>
<p id="n6600235"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “crown of life,” with the genitive “of life” (<span class="greek">τῆς ζωῆς</span>, <span class="translit">tēs zōēs</span>) functioning in apposition to “crown” (<span class="greek">στέφανον</span>, <span class="translit">stephanon</span>): “the crown that consists of life.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600236"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who is victorious”; traditionally, “who overcomes.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600237"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated due to differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600238"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “the following” after “write” is supplied to clarify that what follows is the content of what is to be written.</p></p>
<p id="n6600239"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “These things says [the One]…” See the note on the phrase “this is the solemn pronouncement of” in 2:1.</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>This is the solemn pronouncement of</i> reflects an OT idiom. See the note on this phrase in 2:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6600240"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600240">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the sharp double-edged sword see 1:16.</p></p>
<p id="n6600241"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600241">41</a> <p><b>tc</b> The shorter reading adopted here has superior ms support (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C P 2053 <i>al</i> latt co), while the inclusion of “your works and” (<span class="greek">τὰ ἔργα σου καί</span>, <span class="translit">ta erga sou kai</span>) before “where you reside” is supported by the Byzantine witnesses and is evidently a secondary attempt to harmonize the passage with 2:2, 19; 3:1, 8, 15.</p></p>
<p id="n6600242"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Yet” to indicate the contrast between their location and their faithful behavior.</p></p>
<p id="n6600243"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The present indicative verb <span class="greek">κρατεῖς</span> (<span class="translit">krateis</span>) has been translated as a progressive present.</p></p>
<p id="n6600244"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600244">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the faith”; here the Greek article is used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n6600245"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the faith of me” (<span class="greek">τὴν πίστιν μου</span>, <span class="translit">tēn pistin mou</span>) with the genitive “of me” (<span class="greek">μου</span>) functioning objectively.</p></p>
<p id="n6600246"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “martyr.” The Greek word <span class="greek">μάρτυς</span> can mean either “witness” or “martyr.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600247"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600247">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “killed among you.” The term “city” does not occur in the Greek text of course, but the expression <span class="greek">παρ᾿ ὑμῖν</span>,<span class="greek"> ὅπου ὁ σατανᾶς κατοικεῖ</span> (<span class="translit">par</span>’<span class="translit"> humin, hopou ho satanas katoikei</span>) seems to indicate that this is what is meant. See G. B. Caird, <i>Revelation</i> (HNTC)<i>,</i> 36-38.</p></p>
<p id="n6600248"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600248">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Num 22-24; 31:16.</p></p>
<p id="n6600249"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600249">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, a cause for sinning. An alternate translation is “who instructed Balak to cause the people of Israel to sin by eating food sacrificed to idols…”</p></p>
<p id="n6600250"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600250">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sons,” but the expression <span class="greek">υἱοὶ ᾿Ισραήλ</span> (<span class="translit">huioi Israēl</span>) is an idiom for the people of Israel as an ethnic entity (see L&amp;N 11.58).</p></p>
<p id="n6600251"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Due to the actual events in the OT (Num 22-24; 31:16), <span class="greek">πορνεῦσαι</span> (<span class="translit">porneusai</span>) is taken to mean “sexual immorality.” BDAG 854 s.v. <span class="greek">πορνεύω</span> 1 states, “<i>engage in illicit sex, to fornicate, to whore</i>…W. <span class="greek">φαγεῖν εἰδωλόθυτα</span> ‘eat meat offered to idols’ Rv 2:14, 20.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600252"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600252">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">ὁμοίως</span> (<span class="translit">homoiōs</span>, “likewise”) is left untranslated because it is quite redundant.</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on the term <i>Nicolaitans</i> in 2:6.</p></p>
<p id="n6600253"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600253">53</a> <p><b>tc</b> The “therefore” (<span class="greek">οὖν</span>, <span class="translit">oun</span>) is not found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> 2053 2329 2351 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup> or the Latin <span class="smcaps">mss</span>. It is, however, included in impressive witnesses such as A C 046 1006 1611 sy<sup>p,h</sup> co. Though the conjunction looks at first glance like a scribal clarification, its omission may be explained on the basis of its similarity to the last three letters of the verb “repent” (<span class="greek">μετανόησον</span>, <span class="translit">metanoēson</span>; since <span class="greek">οὖν</span> is a postpositive conjunction in Greek, the final three letters of the verb [<span class="greek">-σον</span>, <span class="translit">-son</span>] would have been immediately followed by <span class="greek">ουν</span>). A scribe could have simply passed over the conjunction in his copy when he saw the last three letters of the imperative verb. A decision is difficult, however, because of the motivation to add to the text and the quality of witnesses that lack the conjunction. </p></p>
<p id="n6600254"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600254">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with them”; the referent (those people who follow the teaching of Balaam and the Nicolaitans) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6600255"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600255">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who is victorious”; traditionally, “who overcomes.” The pendent dative is allowed to stand in the English translation because it is characteristic of the author’s style in Revelation.</p></p>
<p id="n6600256"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600256">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bright.” The Greek term <span class="greek">λευκός</span> (<span class="translit">leukos</span>) can refer either to the color white (traditional here) or to an object that is bright or shining, either from itself or from an outside source of illumination (L&amp;N 14.50; 79.27).</p></p>
<p id="n6600257"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600257">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the interpretation of the stone, L&amp;N 2.27 states, “A number of different suggestions have been made as to the reference of <span class="greek">ψῆφος</span> in this context. Some scholars believe that the white <span class="greek">ψῆφος</span> indicates a vote of acquittal in court. Others contend that it is simply a magical amulet; still others, a token of Roman hospitality; and finally, some have suggested that it may represent a ticket to the gladiatorial games, that is to say, to martyrdom. The context, however, suggests clearly that this is something to be prized and a type of reward for those who have ‘won the victory.’”</p></p>
<p id="n6600258"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600258">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “know”; for the meaning “understand” see L&amp;N 32.4.</p></p>
<p id="n6600259"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600259">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated due to differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600260"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600260">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “the following” after “write” is supplied to clarify that what follows is the content of what is to be written.</p></p>
<p id="n6600261"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600261">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “These things says [the One]…” See the note on the phrase “this is the solemn pronouncement of” in 2:1.</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>This is the solemn pronouncement of</i> reflects an OT idiom. See the note on this phrase in 2:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6600262"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600262">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a flame of fire.” The Greek term <span class="greek">πυρός</span> (<span class="translit">puros</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n6600263"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600263">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> The precise meaning of the term translated “polished bronze” (<span class="greek">χαλκολιβάνῳ</span>, <span class="translit">chalkolibanō</span>), which appears no where else in Greek literature outside of the book of Revelation (see 1:15), is uncertain. Without question it is some sort of metal. BDAG 1076 s.v. <span class="greek">χαλκολίβανον</span> suggests “<i>fine brass/bronze</i>.” L&amp;N 2.57 takes the word to refer to particularly valuable or fine bronze, but notes that the emphasis here and in Rev 1:15 is more on the lustrous quality of the metal.</p></p>
<p id="n6600264"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600264">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and faith.” Here and before the following term <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the next to last and last terms in a list.</p></p>
<p id="n6600265"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600265">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “perseverance.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600266"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600266">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “In fact” is supplied in the translation to bring out the ascensive quality of the clause. It would also be possible to supply here an understood repetition of the phrase “I know” from the beginning of the verse (so NRSV). <i>Grk</i> “and your last deeds [that are] greater than the first.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600267"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600267">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek article has been translated here with demonstrative force. </p></p>
<p id="n6600268"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600268">68</a> <p><b>tc</b> The ms evidence for <span class="greek">γυναῖκα</span> (<span class="translit">gunaika</span>, “woman”) alone includes <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C P 1611 2053 lat. The ms evidence for the addition of “your” (<span class="greek">σου</span>, <span class="translit">sou</span>) includes A 1006 2351 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup> <i>pc</i> sy. With the pronoun, the text reads “your wife, Jezebel” instead of “that woman, Jezebel.” In Revelation, A C are the most important <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, along with <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>47</sup> (which only reads in portions of chapters 9-17) 1006 1611 2053; in this instance, the external evidence slightly favors the shorter reading. But internally, it gains strength. The longer reading implies the idea that the angel in 2:18 is the bishop or leader of the church in Thyatira. The pronoun “your” (<span class="greek">σου</span>) is used four times in vv. 19-20 and may have been the cause for the scribe copying it again. Further, once the monarchical episcopate was in vogue (beginning in the 2nd century) scribes might have been prone to add “your” here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600269"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600269">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Jezebel</i> was the name of King Ahab’s idolatrous and wicked queen in 1 Kgs 16:31; 18:1-5; 19:1-3; 21:5-24. It is probable that the individual named here was analogous to her prototype in idolatry and immoral behavior, since those are the items singled out for mention.</p></p>
<p id="n6600270"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600270">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “teaches and deceives” (<span class="greek">διδάσκει καὶ πλανᾷ</span>, <span class="translit">didaskei kai plana</span>), a construction in which the first verb appears to specify the means by which the second is accomplished: “by her teaching, deceives…”</p></p>
<p id="n6600271"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600271">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6600272"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600272">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To commit sexual immorality and to eat food sacrificed to idols</i>. Note the conclusions of the Jerusalem Council in Acts 15:29, which specifically prohibits Gentile Christians from engaging in these activities.</p></p>
<p id="n6600273"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600273">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600274"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600274">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to bring out the contrast present in this woman’s obstinate refusal to repent.</p></p>
<p id="n6600275"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600275">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “onto a bed,” in this context an idiom for severe illness (L&amp;N 23.152).</p></p>
<p id="n6600276"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600276">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “into great distress.” The suffering here is not specified as physical or emotional, and could involve persecution.</p></p>
<p id="n6600277"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600277">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “her children,” but in this context a reference to this woman’s followers or disciples is more likely meant.</p></p>
<p id="n6600278"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600278">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I will kill with death.” <span class="greek">θάνατος</span> (<span class="translit">thanatos</span>) can in particular contexts refer to a manner of death, specifically a contagious disease (see BDAG 443 s.v. 3; L&amp;N 23.158).</p></p>
<p id="n6600279"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600279">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I will give.” The sense of <span class="greek">δίδωμι</span> (<span class="translit">didōmi</span>) in this context is more “repay” than “give.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600280"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600280">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> This pronoun and the following one are plural in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n6600281"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600281">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “each one of you according to your works.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600282"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600282">82</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, the <i>teaching</i> of Jezebel (v. 20).</p></p>
<p id="n6600283"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600283">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “deep things.” For the translation “deep secrets” see L&amp;N 28.76; cf. NAB, NIV, CEV.</p></p>
<p id="n6600284"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600284">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who is victorious”; traditionally, “who overcomes.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600285"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600285">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “keeps.” In a context that speaks of “holding on to what you have,” the idea here is one of continued faithful behavior (BDAG 1002 s.v. <span class="greek">τηρέω</span> 3 has “<span class="greek">ὁ τηρῶν τὰ ἔργα μου</span> <i>the one who takes my deeds to heart</i> Rv 2:26”).</p></p>
<p id="n6600286"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600286">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “over the Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n6600287"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600287">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600288"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600288">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will shepherd.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600289"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600289">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scepter.” The Greek term <span class="greek">ῥάβδος</span> (<span class="translit">rhabdos</span>) can mean either “rod” or “scepter.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600290"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600290">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 2:9 (with the line introducing the quotation containing a partial allusion to Ps 2:8). See also Rev 12:5; 19:15.</p></p>
<p id="n6600291"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600291">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> What has been received is not specified in the Greek text, but must be supplied from the context. In the light of the two immediately preceding verses about rulership or dominion, it seems that the implied direct object of <span class="greek">εἴληφα</span> (<span class="translit">eil</span><span class="translit">ē</span><span class="translit">pha</span>) is “the right to rule” (i.e., <span class="greek">ἔχειν ἐξουσίαν ποιμάνειν</span>, <span class="translit">echein exousian poimanein</span>), although many modern translations supply the word “authority” here (so NAB, NRSV, NLT).</p></p>
<p id="n6600292"><a href="file1235.xhtml#n6600292">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this expression BDAG 892 s.v. <span class="greek">πρωϊνός</span> states, “<i>early, belonging to the morning</i> <span class="greek">ὁ ἀστὴρ ὁ πρ</span>. <i>the morning star,</i> Venus Rv 2:28; 22:16.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
