<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Mark 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Sower </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Again he began to teach by the lake. Such a large crowd gathered around him that he got into a boat<sup><a id="n410041" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n410041">1</a></sup> on the lake and sat there while<sup><a id="n410042" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n410042">2</a></sup> the whole crowd was on the shore by the lake. <span class="verse">4:2</span> He taught them many things in parables,<sup><a id="n410043" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n410043">3</a></sup> and in his teaching said to them: <span class="verse">4:3</span> “Listen! A sower went out to sow.<sup><a id="n410044" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n410044">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:4</span> And as he sowed, some seed<sup><a id="n410045" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n410045">5</a></sup> fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured it. <span class="verse">4:5</span> Other seed fell on rocky ground<sup><a id="n410046" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n410046">6</a></sup> where it did not have much soil. It sprang up at once because the soil was not deep.<sup><a id="n410047" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n410047">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:6</span> When the sun came up it was scorched, and because it did not have sufficient root,<sup><a id="n410048" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n410048">8</a></sup> it withered. <span class="verse">4:7</span> Other seed fell among the thorns,<sup><a id="n410049" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n410049">9</a></sup> and they grew up and choked it,<sup><a id="n4100410" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100410">10</a></sup> and it did not produce grain. <span class="verse">4:8</span> But<sup><a id="n4100411" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100411">11</a></sup> other seed fell on good soil and produced grain, sprouting and growing; some yielded thirty times as much, some sixty, and some a hundred times.” <span class="verse">4:9</span> And he said, “Whoever has ears to hear had better listen!”<sup><a id="n4100412" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100412">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Purpose of Parables </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:10</span> When he was alone, those around him with the twelve asked him about the parables. <span class="verse">4:11</span> He said to them, “The secret<sup><a id="n4100413" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100413">13</a></sup> of the kingdom of God<sup><a id="n4100414" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100414">14</a></sup> has been given<sup><a id="n4100415" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100415">15</a></sup> to you. But to those outside, everything is in parables, </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">4:12</span> so that <b><i>although they look they may look but not see,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>and although they hear they may hear but not understand,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>so they may not repent and be forgiven</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4100416" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100416">16</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:13</span> He said to them, “Don’t you understand this parable? Then<sup><a id="n4100417" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100417">17</a></sup> how will you understand any parable? <span class="verse">4:14</span> The sower sows the word. <span class="verse">4:15</span> These are the ones on the path where the word is sown: Whenever they hear, immediately Satan<sup><a id="n4100418" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100418">18</a></sup> comes and snatches the word<sup><a id="n4100419" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100419">19</a></sup> that was sown in them. <span class="verse">4:16</span> These are the ones sown on rocky ground: As soon as they hear the word, they receive it with joy. <span class="verse">4:17</span> But<sup><a id="n4100420" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100420">20</a></sup> they have no root in themselves and do not endure.<sup><a id="n4100421" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100421">21</a></sup> Then, when trouble or persecution comes because of the word, immediately they fall away. <span class="verse">4:18</span> Others are the ones sown among thorns: They are those who hear the word, <span class="verse">4:19</span> but<sup><a id="n4100422" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100422">22</a></sup> worldly cares, the seductiveness of wealth,<sup><a id="n4100423" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100423">23</a></sup> and the desire for other things come in and choke the word,<sup><a id="n4100424" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100424">24</a></sup> and it produces nothing. <span class="verse">4:20</span> But<sup><a id="n4100425" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100425">25</a></sup> these are the ones sown on good soil: They hear the word and receive it and bear fruit, one thirty times as much, one sixty, and one a hundred.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Lamp</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:21</span> He also said to them, “A lamp<sup><a id="n4100426" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100426">26</a></sup> isn’t brought to be put under a basket<sup><a id="n4100427" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100427">27</a></sup> or under a bed, is it? Isn’t it to be placed on a lampstand? <span class="verse">4:22</span> For nothing is hidden except to be revealed,<sup><a id="n4100428" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100428">28</a></sup> and nothing concealed except to be brought to light. <span class="verse">4:23</span> If anyone has ears to hear, he had better listen!”<sup><a id="n4100429" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100429">29</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:24</span> And he said to them, “Take care about what you hear. The measure you use will be the measure you receive,<sup><a id="n4100430" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100430">30</a></sup> and more will be added to you. <span class="verse">4:25</span> For whoever has will be given more, but<sup><a id="n4100431" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100431">31</a></sup> whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.”<sup><a id="n4100432" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100432">32</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Growing Seed</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:26</span> He also said, “The kingdom of God<sup><a id="n4100433" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100433">33</a></sup> is like someone who spreads seed on the ground. <span class="verse">4:27</span> He goes to sleep and gets up, night and day, and the seed sprouts and grows, though he does not know how. <span class="verse">4:28</span> By itself the soil produces a crop, first the stalk, then the head, then the full grain<sup><a id="n4100434" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100434">34</a></sup> in the head. <span class="verse">4:29</span> And when the grain is ripe, he sends in the sickle<sup><a id="n4100435" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100435">35</a></sup> because the harvest has come.”<sup><a id="n4100436" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100436">36</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Mustard Seed </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:30</span> He also asked, “To what can we compare the kingdom of God,<sup><a id="n4100437" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100437">37</a></sup> or what parable can we use to present it? <span class="verse">4:31</span> It is like a mustard seed<sup><a id="n4100438" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100438">38</a></sup> that when sown in the ground, even though it is the smallest of all the seeds in the ground— <span class="verse">4:32</span> when it is sown, it grows up,<sup><a id="n4100439" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100439">39</a></sup> becomes the greatest of all garden plants, and grows large branches so that the wild birds<sup><a id="n4100440" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100440">40</a></sup> can nest in its shade.”<sup><a id="n4100441" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100441">41</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Use of Parables </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:33</span> So<sup><a id="n4100442" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100442">42</a></sup> with many parables like these, he spoke the word to them, as they were able to hear. <span class="verse">4:34</span> He did not speak to them without a parable. But privately he explained everything to his own disciples. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Stilling of a Storm </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:35</span> On that day, when evening came, Jesus<sup><a id="n4100443" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100443">43</a></sup> said to his disciples, “Let’s go across to the other side of the lake.”<sup><a id="n4100444" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100444">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:36</span> So<sup><a id="n4100445" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100445">45</a></sup> after leaving the crowd, they took him along, just as he was, in the boat,<sup><a id="n4100446" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100446">46</a></sup> and other boats were with him. <span class="verse">4:37</span> Now<sup><a id="n4100447" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100447">47</a></sup> a great windstorm<sup><a id="n4100448" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100448">48</a></sup> developed and the waves were breaking into the boat, so that the boat was nearly swamped. <span class="verse">4:38</span> But<sup><a id="n4100449" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100449">49</a></sup> he was in the stern, sleeping on a cushion. They woke him up and said to him, “Teacher, don’t you care that we are about to die?” <span class="verse">4:39</span> So<sup><a id="n4100450" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100450">50</a></sup> he got up and rebuked<sup><a id="n4100451" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100451">51</a></sup> the wind, and said to the sea,<sup><a id="n4100452" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100452">52</a></sup> “Be quiet! Calm down!” Then<sup><a id="n4100453" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100453">53</a></sup> the wind stopped, and it was dead calm. <span class="verse">4:40</span> And he said to them, “Why are you cowardly? Do you still not have faith?” <span class="verse">4:41</span> They were overwhelmed by fear and said to one another, “Who then is this?<sup><a id="n4100454" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100454">54</a></sup> Even the wind and sea obey him!”<sup><a id="n4100455" href="file1002_notes.xhtml#n4100455">55</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>