<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 10</h2>
<p id="n660101"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n660101">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660102"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n660102">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “clothed.”</p></p>
<p id="n660103"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n660103">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “like fiery pillars,” translating <span class="greek">πυρός</span> (<span class="translit">puros</span>) as an attributive genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n660104"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n660104">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and having.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the pronoun “he.”</p></p>
<p id="n660105"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n660105">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660106"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n660106">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n660107"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n660107">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “just then” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n660108"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n660108">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660109"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n660109">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this phrase see BDAG 1092 s.v. <span class="greek">χρόνος</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n6601010"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601010">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601011"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601011">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The aorist <span class="greek">ἐτελέσθη</span> (<span class="translit">etelesthē</span>) has been translated as a proleptic (futuristic) aorist (<i>ExSyn</i> 564 cites this verse as an example).</p></p>
<p id="n6601012"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601012">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The time of the action described by the aorist <span class="greek">εὐηγγέλισεν</span> (<span class="translit">euēngelisen</span>) seems to be past with respect to the aorist passive <span class="greek">ἐτελέσθη</span> (<span class="translit">etelesthē</span>). This does not require that the prophets in view here be OT prophets. They may actually refer to the martyrs in the church (so G. B. Caird, <i>Revelation</i> [HNTC], 129).</p></p>
<p id="n6601013"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601013">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6601014"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601014">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601015"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601015">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">λαλοῦσαν</span> (<span class="translit">lalousan</span>) has been translated as “began to speak.” The use of <span class="greek">πάλιν</span> (<span class="translit">palin</span>) indicates an ingressive idea.</p></p>
<p id="n6601016"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601016">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with me.” The translation “with me” implies that John was engaged in a dialogue with the one speaking to him (e.g., Jesus or an angel) when in reality it was a one-sided conversation, with John doing all the listening. For this reason, <span class="greek">μετ᾿ ἐμοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">met</span>’<span class="translit"> emou</span>, “with me”) was translated as “to me.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601017"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601017">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “again, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγουσαν</span> (<span class="translit">legousan</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n6601018"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601018">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The perfect passive participle <span class="greek">ἠνεῳγμένον</span> (<span class="translit">ēneōgmenon</span>) is in second attributive position and has been translated as an attributive adjective.</p></p>
<p id="n6601019"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601019">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the instructions given by the voice.</p></p>
<p id="n6601020"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601020">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601021"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601021">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the scroll” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6601022"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601022">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601023"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601023">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the instructions given by the angel.</p></p>
<p id="n6601024"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601024">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it was.” The idea of taste is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n6601025"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601025">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6601026"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601026">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601027"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601027">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> The referent of “they” is not clear in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n6601028"><a href="file1243.xhtml#n6601028">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and nations,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here or before the next item since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
