<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 12</h2>
<p id="n450121"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n450121">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n450122"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n450122">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle and two adjectives “alive, holy, and pleasing to God” are taken as predicates in relation to “sacrifice,” making the exhortation more emphatic. See <i>ExSyn</i> 618-19.</p><p><b>sn</b> Taken as predicate adjectives, the terms <i>alive, holy, and pleasing</i> are showing how unusual is the sacrifice that believers can now offer, for OT sacrifices were dead. As has often been quipped about this text, “The problem with living sacrifices is that they keep crawling off the altar.”</p></p>
<p id="n450123"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n450123">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although <span class="greek">συσχηματίζεσθε</span> (<span class="translit">suschēmatizesthe</span>) could be either a passive or middle, the passive is more likely since it would otherwise have to be a <i>direct</i> middle (“conform yourselves”) and, as such, would be quite rare for NT Greek. It is very telling that being “conformed” to the present world is viewed as a passive notion, for it may suggest that it happens, in part, subconsciously. At the same time, the passive could well be a “permissive passive,” suggesting that there may be some consciousness of the conformity taking place. Most likely, it is a combination of both.</p></p>
<p id="n450124"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n450124">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to this age.”</p></p>
<p id="n450125"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n450125">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The verb translated <i>test and approve</i> (<span class="greek">δοκιμάζω</span>, <span class="translit">dokimazō</span>) carries the sense of “test with a positive outcome,” “test so as to approve.”</p></p>
<p id="n450126"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n450126">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “of you” have been supplied for clarity. </p></p>
<p id="n450127"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n450127">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to each as God has distributed a measure of faith.”</p></p>
<p id="n450128"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n450128">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> This word comes from the same root as “grace” in the following clause; it means “things graciously given,” “grace-gifts.”</p></p>
<p id="n450129"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n450129">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The last part of this verse has no verb; either an indicative or imperative is implied. Most likely an imperative is intended because of the general tenor of this section of the epistle as exhortation and because of the particular flow of this verse, which seems to imply how to use spiritual gifts.</p></p>
<p id="n4501210"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n4501210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb “must be” is understood in the Greek text. </p></p>
<p id="n4501211"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n4501211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “but give yourselves to menial tasks.” The translation depends on whether one takes the adjective “lowly” as masculine or neuter.</p></p>
<p id="n4501212"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n4501212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Do not be wise in your thinking.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501213"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n4501213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used as a generic and refers to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n4501214"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n4501214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used as a generic and refers to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n4501215"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n4501215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the wrath,” referring to God’s wrath as the remainder of the verse shows.</p></p>
<p id="n4501216"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n4501216">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 32:35.</p></p>
<p id="n4501217"><a href="file1103.xhtml#n4501217">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Prov 25:21-22.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
