<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 James 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>James<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Power of the Tongue</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n590031" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n590031">1</a></sup> because you know that we will be judged more strictly.<sup><a id="n590032" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n590032">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:2</span> For we all stumble<sup><a id="n590033" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n590033">3</a></sup> in many ways. If someone does not stumble<sup><a id="n590034" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n590034">4</a></sup> in what he says,<sup><a id="n590035" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n590035">5</a></sup> he is a perfect individual,<sup><a id="n590036" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n590036">6</a></sup> able to control the entire body as well. <span class="verse">3:3</span> And if we put bits into the mouths of horses to get them to obey us, then we guide their entire bodies.<sup><a id="n590037" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n590037">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:4</span> Look at ships too: Though they are so large and driven by harsh winds, they are steered by a tiny rudder wherever the pilot’s inclination directs. <span class="verse">3:5</span> So too the tongue is a small part of the body,<sup><a id="n590038" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n590038">8</a></sup> yet it has great pretensions.<sup><a id="n590039" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n590039">9</a></sup> Think<sup><a id="n5900310" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900310">10</a></sup> how small a flame sets a huge forest ablaze. <span class="verse">3:6</span> And the tongue is a fire! The tongue represents<sup><a id="n5900311" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900311">11</a></sup> the world of wrongdoing among the parts of our bodies. It<sup><a id="n5900312" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900312">12</a></sup> pollutes the entire body and sets fire to the course of human existence—and is set on fire by hell.<sup><a id="n5900313" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900313">13</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:7</span> For every kind of animal, bird, reptile, and sea creature<sup><a id="n5900314" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900314">14</a></sup> is subdued and has been subdued by humankind.<sup><a id="n5900315" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900315">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:8</span> But no human being can subdue the tongue; it is a restless<sup><a id="n5900316" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900316">16</a></sup> evil, full of deadly poison. <span class="verse">3:9</span> With it we bless the Lord<sup><a id="n5900317" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900317">17</a></sup> and Father, and with it we curse people<sup><a id="n5900318" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900318">18</a></sup> made in God’s image. <span class="verse">3:10</span> From the same mouth come blessing and cursing. These things should not be so, my brothers and sisters.<sup><a id="n5900319" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900319">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:11</span> A spring does not pour out fresh water and bitter water from the same opening, does it? <span class="verse">3:12</span> Can a fig tree produce olives, my brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5900320" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900320">20</a></sup> or a vine produce figs? Neither can a salt water spring produce fresh water. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">True Wisdom</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:13</span> Who is wise and understanding among you? By his good conduct he should show his works done in the gentleness that wisdom brings.<sup><a id="n5900321" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900321">21</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:14</span> But if you have bitter jealousy and selfishness in your hearts, do not boast and tell lies against the truth. <span class="verse">3:15</span> Such<sup><a id="n5900322" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900322">22</a></sup> wisdom does not come<sup><a id="n5900323" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900323">23</a></sup> from above but is earthly, natural,<sup><a id="n5900324" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900324">24</a></sup> demonic. <span class="verse">3:16</span> For where there is jealousy and selfishness, there is disorder and every evil practice. <span class="verse">3:17</span> But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, accommodating,<sup><a id="n5900325" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900325">25</a></sup> full of mercy and good fruit,<sup><a id="n5900326" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900326">26</a></sup> impartial, and not hypocritical.<sup><a id="n5900327" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900327">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:18</span> And the fruit that consists of righteousness<sup><a id="n5900328" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900328">28</a></sup> is planted<sup><a id="n5900329" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900329">29</a></sup> in peace among<sup><a id="n5900330" href="file1208_notes.xhtml#n5900330">30</a></sup> those who make peace. </p>

</body>
</html>