<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 22</h2>
<p id="n420221"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n420221">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>Feast of Unleavened Bread</i> was a week long celebration that followed the day of Passover, so one name was used for both feasts (Exod 12:1-20; 23:15; 34:18; Deut 16:1-8).</p></p>
<p id="n420222"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n420222">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n420223"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n420223">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n420224"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n420224">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “were seeking how.”</p></p>
<p id="n420225"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n420225">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek verb here means “to get rid of by execution” (BDAG 64 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναιρέω</span> 2; cf. also L&amp;N 20.71, which states, “to get rid of someone by execution, often with legal or quasi-legal procedures”).</p></p>
<p id="n420226"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n420226">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n420227"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n420227">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> The suggestion here is that Jesus was too popular to openly arrest him. The verb <i>were trying</i> is imperfect. It suggests, in this context, that they were always considering the opportunities.</p></p>
<p id="n420228"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n420228">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n420229"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n420229">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> The cross is portrayed as part of the cosmic battle between <i>Satan</i> and God; see Luke 4:1-13; 11:14-23.</p></p>
<p id="n4202210"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202211"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The full title <span class="greek">στρατηγὸς τοῦ ἱεροῦ</span> (<span class="translit">stratēgos tou hierou</span>; “officer of the temple” or “captain of the temple guard”) is sometimes shortened to <span class="greek">στρατηγός</span> as here (L&amp;N 37.91).</p></p>
<p id="n4202212"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Luke uses this frequent indirect question to make his point (BDF §267.2).</p></p>
<p id="n4202213"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202214"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “how he might hand him over to them,” in the sense of “betray him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202215"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4202216"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202216">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> The leaders <i>were delighted</i> when Judas contacted them about betraying Jesus, because it gave them the opportunity they had been looking for, and they could later claim that Jesus had been betrayed by one of his own disciples.</p></p>
<p id="n4202217"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202217">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> Matt 26:15 states the amount of <i>money</i> they gave Judas was thirty pieces of silver (see also Matt 27:3-4; Zech 11:12-13).</p></p>
<p id="n4202218"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the arrangement worked out in the preceding verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4202219"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Judas) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202220"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “betray him to them”; the referent of the first pronoun (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202221"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “apart from the crowd.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The leaders wanted to do this quietly, <i>when no crowd was present</i>, so no public uproar would result (cf. v. 21:38; 22:2).</p></p>
<p id="n4202222"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “for the feast” are not in the Greek text, but have been supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202223"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202223">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> Generally <i>the feast of Unleavened Bread</i> would refer to Nisan 15 (Friday), but the following reference to the sacrifice of the <i>Passover</i> lamb indicates that Nisan 14 (Thursday) was what Luke had in mind (Nisan = March 27 to April 25). The celebration of the Feast of Unleavened Bread lasted eight days, beginning with the Passover meal. The celebrations were so close together that at times the names of both were used interchangeably.</p></p>
<p id="n4202224"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202225"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202225">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> This required getting a suitable lamb and finding lodging in Jerusalem where the meal could be eaten. The population of the city swelled during the feast, so lodging could be difficult to find. The <i>Passover</i> was celebrated each year in commemoration of the Israelites’ deliverance from Egypt; thus it was a feast celebrating redemption (see Exod 12). The Passover lamb was roasted and eaten after sunset in a family group of at least ten people (<i>m. Pesahim</i> 7.13). People ate the meal while reclining (see the note on <i>table</i> in 22:14). It included, besides the lamb, unleavened bread and bitter herbs as a reminder of Israel’s bitter affliction at the hands of the Egyptians. Four cups of wine mixed with water were also used for the meal. For a further description of the meal and the significance of the wine cups, see E. Ferguson, <i>Backgrounds of Early Christianity,</i> 523-24.</p></p>
<p id="n4202226"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for us, so that we may eat.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202227"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4202228"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> In the Greek text this a deliberative subjunctive.</p></p>
<p id="n4202229"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202230"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202230">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> Since women usually carried these jars, it would have been no problem for Peter and John to recognize the <i>man</i> Jesus was referring to.</p></p>
<p id="n4202231"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202231">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus is portrayed throughout Luke 22-23 as very aware of what will happen, almost directing events. Here this is indicated by his prediction that <i>a man carrying a jar of water will meet you</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4202232"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the master of the household,” referring to one who owns and manages the household, including family, servants, and slaves (L&amp;N 57.14).</p></p>
<p id="n4202233"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Jesus’ instructions.</p></p>
<p id="n4202234"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “things” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4202235"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202235">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> The author’s note that the disciples found things <i>just as he had told them</i> shows that Jesus’ word could be trusted.</p></p>
<p id="n4202236"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4202237"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202238"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “reclined at table,” as 1st century middle eastern meals were not eaten while sitting at a table, but while reclining on one’s side on the floor with the head closest to the low table and the feet farthest away.</p></p>
<p id="n4202239"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the apostles with him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202240"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202240">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> This phrase parallels a Hebrew infinitive absolute and serves to underline Jesus’ enthusiasm for holding this meal (BDF §198.6).</p></p>
<p id="n4202241"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the word “again” is not in the Greek text, it is supplied to indicate that Jesus did indeed partake of this Passover meal, as statements in v. 18 suggest (“from now on”). For more complete discussion see D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> (BECNT), 2:1720.</p></p>
<p id="n4202242"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202242">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus looked to a celebration in the kingdom to come when the Passover <i>is fulfilled</i>. This reference could well suggest that some type of commemorative sacrifice and meal will be celebrated then, as the antecedent is the Passover sacrifice. The reference is not to the Lord’s supper as some argue, but the Passover.</p></p>
<p id="n4202243"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202243">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> here refers to the kingdom in all its power. See Luke 17:20-37.</p></p>
<p id="n4202244"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202244">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202245"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202245">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Then he took a cup</i>. Only Luke mentions two cups at this meal; the other synoptic gospels (Matt, Mark) mention only one. This is the first of the two. It probably refers to the first cup in the traditional Passover meal, which today has four cups (although it is debated whether the fourth cup was used in the 1st century).</p></p>
<p id="n4202246"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the produce” (“the produce of the vine” is a figurative expression for wine).</p></p>
<p id="n4202247"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202247">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Until the kingdom of God comes</i> is a reference to the kingdom in all its power. See Luke 17:20-37. Jesus awaits celebration with the arrival of full kingdom blessing.</p></p>
<p id="n4202248"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202249"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202249">49</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some significant Western witnesses (D it) lack the words from this point to the end of v. 20. However, the authenticity of these verses is very likely. It is found in a variety of witnesses that represent a broad geographical base (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C L T<sup>vid</sup> W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> co), rendering the rise of the shorter reading much easier of explanation than the reverse. Further, the inclusion of the second cup is the harder reading, since it differs from Matt 26:26-29 and Mark 14:22-25. Further discussion of this complicated problem (the most difficult in Luke) can be found in <i>TCGNT</i> 148-50.</p></p>
<p id="n4202250"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202250">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> The language of the phrase <i>given for you</i> alludes to Christ’s death in our place. It is a powerful substitutionary image of what he did for us.</p></p>
<p id="n4202251"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “he took” are not in the Greek text at this point, but are an understood repetition from v. 19.</p></p>
<p id="n4202252"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202252">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “after they had eaten” translates the temporal infinitive construction <span class="greek">μετὰ τὸ δειπνῆσαι</span> (<span class="translit">meta to deipnēsai</span>), where the verb <span class="greek">δειπνέω</span> (<span class="translit">deipneō</span>) means “to eat a meal” or “to have a meal.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202253"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202253">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ death established the forgiveness promised in the <i>new covenant</i> of Jer 31:31. Jesus is reinterpreting the symbolism of the Passover meal, indicating the presence of a new era.</p></p>
<p id="n4202254"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202254">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The one who betrays me</i>. Jesus knows about Judas and what he has done.</p></p>
<p id="n4202255"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202255">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of Jesus’ comment here is not to identify the specific individual per se, but to indicate that it is one who was close to him—somebody whom no one would suspect. His comment serves to heighten the treachery of Judas’ betrayal.</p></p>
<p id="n4202256"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202256">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ death <i>has been determined</i> as a part of God’s plan (Acts 2:22-24).</p></p>
<p id="n4202257"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202257">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Jesus’ comments: The disciples begin wondering who would betray him.</p></p>
<p id="n4202258"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202258">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “happened.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202259"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202259">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though the term <span class="greek">μείζων</span> (<span class="translit">meizōn</span>) here is comparative in form, it is superlative in sense (BDF §244).</p></p>
<p id="n4202260"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202260">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the dispute among the apostles.</p></p>
<p id="n4202261"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202261">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202262"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202262">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> The title ‘<i>benefactor</i>,’ highlighting grace and meaning something like “helper of the people,” was even given to tyrants (2 Macc 4:2; 3 Macc 3:19; Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 3.9.8 [3.459]).</p></p>
<p id="n4202263"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202263">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But you are not thus.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202264"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202264">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the ruler.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202265"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202265">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>And the leader like the one who serves</i>. Leadership was not to be a matter of privilege and special status, but of service. All social status is leveled out by these remarks. Jesus himself is the prime example of the servant-leader.</p></p>
<p id="n4202266"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202266">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who reclines at table,” as 1st century middle eastern meals were not eaten while sitting at a table, but while reclining on one’s side on the floor with the head closest to the low table and the feet farthest away.</p></p>
<p id="n4202267"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202267">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> The interrogative particle used here in the Greek text (<span class="greek">οὐχί</span>, <span class="translit">ouchi</span>) expects a positive reply.</p></p>
<p id="n4202268"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202268">68</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ example of humble service, <i>as one who serves</i>, shows that the standard for a disciple is different from that of the world. For an example see John 13:1-17.</p></p>
<p id="n4202269"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202269">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “continued” (L&amp;N 34.3). Jesus acknowledges the disciples’ faithfulness.</p></p>
<p id="n4202270"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202270">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “thus” to indicate the implied result of the disciples’ perseverance with Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4202271"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202271">71</a> <p><b>sn</b> With the statement “<i>I grant to you a kingdom</i>” Jesus gave the disciples authority over the kingdom, as God had given him such authority. The present tense looks at authority given presently, though the major manifestation of its presence is yet to come as the next verse shows.</p></p>
<p id="n4202272"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202272">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I give you the right to rule” (cf. CEV). For this translation of <span class="greek">διατίθεμαι βασιλείαν</span> (<span class="translit">diatithemai basileian</span>) see L&amp;N 37.105.</p></p>
<p id="n4202273"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202273">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb is future indicative, and thus not subordinate to “grant” (<span class="greek">διατίθεμαι</span>, <span class="translit">diatithemai</span>) as part of the result clause beginning with <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> <span class="greek">ἔσθητε</span> (<span class="translit">hina esthēte</span>) at the beginning of v. 30. It is better understood as a predictive future.</p></p>
<p id="n4202274"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202274">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> The statement <i>you will sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel</i> looks at the future authority the Twelve will have when Jesus returns. They will share in Israel’s judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n4202275"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202275">75</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> as well as several versional witnesses) begin this verse with an introductory comment, “and the Lord said,” indicating a change in the subject of discussion. But this is apparently a reading motivated by the need for clarity. Some of the best witnesses, along with a few others (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> B L T 1241 2542<sup>c</sup> sy<sup>s</sup> co), do not contain these words. The abrupt shift is the more difficult reading and thus more likely to be autographic.</p></p>
<p id="n4202276"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202276">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold” (for “pay attention” see L&amp;N 91.13).</p></p>
<p id="n4202277"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202277">77</a> <p><b>sn</b> This pronoun is plural in the Greek text, so it refers to <i>all</i> the disciples of which Peter is the representative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202278"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202278">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> Satan has demanded permission to put them to the test. The idiom “<i>sift</i> (someone) <i>like wheat</i>” is similar to the English idiom “to pick (someone) apart.” The pronoun <i>you</i> is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4202279"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202279">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here and in the remainder of the verse the second person pronouns are singular, so only Peter is in view. The name “Simon” has been supplied as a form of direct address to make this clear in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4202280"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202280">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>That your faith may not fail</i>. Note that Peter’s denials are pictured here as lapses, not as a total absence of faith.</p></p>
<p id="n4202281"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202281">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4202282"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202282">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “turned around.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202283"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202283">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Strengthen your brothers</i> refers to Peter helping to <i>strengthen</i> their faith. Jesus quite graciously restores Peter “in advance,” even with the knowledge of his approaching denials.</p></p>
<p id="n4202284"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202284">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Peter) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202285"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202285">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> The confidence Peter has in private (<i>Lord, I am ready…</i>) will wilt under the pressure of the public eye.</p></p>
<p id="n4202286"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202286">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he said”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202287"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202287">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, Peter’s denials will happen before the sun rises.</p></p>
<p id="n4202288"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202288">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> Once again, Jesus is quite aware that Peter will deny him. Peter, however, is too nonchalant about the possibility of stumbling.</p></p>
<p id="n4202289"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202289">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202290"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202290">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202291"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202291">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “purse” (likewise in v. 36).</p></p>
<p id="n4202292"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202292">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “beggar’s bag” (L&amp;N 6.145).</p></p>
<p id="n4202293"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202293">93</a> <p><b>sn</b> This refers back to 9:3 and 10:3-4. The Greek construction anticipates a negative reply which is indicated in the translation by the ‘tag’ at the end, “did you?” Nothing was lacking.</p></p>
<p id="n4202294"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202294">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202295"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202295">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> The syntax of this verse is disputed, resulting in various translations. The major options are either (1) that reflected in the translation or (2) that those who have a money bag and traveler’s bag should get a sword, just as those who do not have these items should sell their cloak to buy a sword. The point of all the options is that things have changed and one now needs full provisions. Opposition will come. But “sword” is a figure for preparing to fight. See Luke 22:50-51.</p></p>
<p id="n4202296"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202296">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “beggar’s bag” (L&amp;N 6.145).</p></p>
<p id="n4202297"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202297">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>This scripture must be fulfilled in me</i>. The statement again reflects the divine necessity of God’s plan. See 4:43-44.</p></p>
<p id="n4202298"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202298">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with the lawless.” </p><p><b>sn</b> This is a quotation from Isa 53:12. It highlights a theme of Luke 22-23. Though completely innocent, Jesus dies as if he were a criminal.</p></p>
<p id="n4202299"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n4202299">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is having its fulfillment.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022100"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Jesus’ comments about obtaining swords.</p></p>
<p id="n42022101"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022101">101</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Here are two swords</i>. The disciples mistakenly took Jesus to mean that they should prepare for armed resistance, something he will have to correct in 22:50-51.</p></p>
<p id="n42022102"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022102">102</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>It is enough</i>. The disciples’ misunderstanding caused Jesus to terminate the discussion.</p></p>
<p id="n42022103"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42022104"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42022105"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “went.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022106"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022106">106</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the <i>Mount of Olives</i> in Luke 19:29.</p></p>
<p id="n42022107"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> Luke does not mention Gethsemane by name, but calls it simply <i>the place</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n42022108"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022108">108</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ instructions to pray not to <i>fall into temptation</i> is an allusion to Luke 22:28-38, especially 22:31. The temptation is Satan’s challenge to them to defect, like what happened to Judas and what will happen to Peter.</p></p>
<p id="n42022109"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> Luke’s term <span class="greek">παρένεγκε</span> is not as exact as the one in Matt 26:39. Luke’s means “take away” (BDAG 772 s.v. <span class="greek">παρένεγκε</span> 2.c) while Matthew’s means “take away without touching,” suggesting an alteration (if possible) in God’s plan. For further discussion see D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> (BECNT), 2:1759-60.</p></p>
<p id="n42022110"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022110">110</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>This cup</i> alludes to the wrath of God that Jesus would experience (in the form of suffering and death) for us. See Pss 11:6; 75:8-9; Isa 51:17, 19, 22 for this figure.</p></p>
<p id="n42022111"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022111">111</a> <p><b>sn</b> With the statement “<i>Not my will but yours be done</i>” Jesus submitted fully to God’s will.</p></p>
<p id="n42022112"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And being in anguish.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022113"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022113">113</a> <p><b>tc</b> Several significant Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> A B N T W 579 1071*) along with diverse and widespread versional witnesses lack <b>22:43-44</b>. In addition, the verses are placed after Matt 26:39 by ƒ<sup>13</sup>. Floating texts typically suggest both spuriousness and early scribal impulses to regard the verses as <i>historically</i> authentic. These verses are included in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*<sup>,2</sup> D L <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0171 ƒ<sup>1</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat Ju Ir Hipp Eus. However, a number of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> mark the text with an asterisk or obelisk, indicating the scribe’s assessment of the verses as inauthentic. At the same time, these verses generally fit Luke’s style. Arguments can be given on both sides about whether scribes would tend to include or omit such comments about Jesus’ humanity and an angel’s help. But even if the verses are not <i>literarily</i> authentic, they are probably <i>historically</i> authentic. This is due to the fact that this text was well known in several different locales from a very early period. Since there are no synoptic parallels to this account and since there is no obvious reason for adding these words here, it is very likely that such verses recount a part of the actual suffering of our Lord. Nevertheless, because of the serious doubts as to these verses’ authenticity, they have been put in brackets. For an important discussion of this problem, see B. D. Ehrman and M. A. Plunkett, “The Angel and the Agony: The Textual Problem of Luke 22:43-44, ” <i>CBQ</i> 45 (1983): 401-16.</p><p><b>sn</b> Angelic aid is noted elsewhere in the gospels: Matt 4:11 = Mark 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n42022114"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42022115"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from grief.” The word “exhausted” is not in the Greek text, but is implied; the disciples have fallen asleep from mental and emotional exhaustion resulting from their distress (see L&amp;N 25.273; cf. TEV, NIV, NLT).</p></p>
<p id="n42022116"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Jesus finding them asleep.</p></p>
<p id="n42022117"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022117">117</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus calls the disciples again to prayerful watchfulness with the words “<i>Get up and pray</i>” (see 22:40). The time is full of danger (22:53).</p></p>
<p id="n42022118"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “While he was still speaking, behold, a crowd, and the one called Judas…was leading them.” The abrupt appearance of the crowd on the scene is indicated in the translation by “suddenly” and “appeared.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022119"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “drew near.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022120"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022120">120</a> <p><b>tc</b> Many <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 700 <i>pm</i> as well as several versional <span class="smcaps">mss</span>) add here, “for this is the sign he gave to them: Whoever I kiss is [the one].” This addition is almost certainly not original, since most of the significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> lack it. It may be a copyist’s attempt to clarify the text, or the accidental inclusion of a marginal gloss.</p></p>
<p id="n42022121"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022121">121</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ comment about betraying the Son of Man <i>with a kiss</i> shows the hypocrisy and blindness of an attempt to cover up sin. On “misused kisses” in the Bible, see Gen 27:26-27; 2 Sam 15:5; Prov 7:13; 27:6; 2 Sam 20:9.</p></p>
<p id="n42022122"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42022123"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> The direct question using “if” in Greek is not unusual (BDF §440.3).</p></p>
<p id="n42022124"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022124">124</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>Should we use our swords?</i>” The disciples’ effort to defend Jesus recalls Luke 22:35-38. One individual did not wait for the answer.</p></p>
<p id="n42022125"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42022126"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022126">126</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>One of them</i>. The unnamed disciple is Peter according to John 18:10 (cf. also Matt 26:51; Mark 14:47).</p></p>
<p id="n42022127"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 7:2.</p></p>
<p id="n42022128"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But answering, Jesus said.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n42022129"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (the slave of the high priest mentioned in the previous verse) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42022130"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022130">130</a> <p><b>sn</b> When Jesus <i>healed</i> the man’s ear he showed grace even to those who hated him, following his own teaching (Luke 6:27-36).</p></p>
<p id="n42022131"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42022132"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> This title, literally “official of the temple” (<span class="greek">στρατηγὸς τοῦ ἱεροῦ</span>, <span class="translit">stratēgos tou hierou</span>), referred to the commander of the Jewish soldiers who guarded and maintained order in the Jerusalem temple. Here, since the term is plural, it has been translated “officers of the temple guard” rather than “commanders of the temple guard,” since the idea of a number of commanders might be confusing to the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n42022133"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a revolutionary.” This term can refer to one who stirs up rebellion: BDAG 594 s.v. <span class="greek">λῃστής</span> 2 has “<i>revolutionary, insurrectionist</i>, <i>guerrilla</i>” citing evidence from Josephus (<i>J. W</i>. 2.13.2-3 [2.253-254]). However, this usage generally postdates Jesus’ time. It does refer to a figure of violence. Luke uses the same term for the highwaymen who attack the traveler in the parable of the good Samaritan (10:30).</p></p>
<p id="n42022134"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the temple.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022135"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “lay hands on me.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022136"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “your time.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022137"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “authority,” “domain.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022138"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42022139"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022139">139</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “seized” (L&amp;N 37.109).</p></p>
<p id="n42022140"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42022141"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022141">141</a> <p><b>sn</b> Putting all the gospel accounts together, there is a brief encounter with Annas (<i>brought him into the high priest’s house</i>, here and John 18:13, where Annas is named); the meeting led by Caiaphas (Matt 26:57-68 = Mark 14:53-65); and then a Sanhedrin meeting (Matt 27:1; Mark 15:1; Luke 22:66-71). These latter two meetings might be connected and apparently went into the morning.</p></p>
<p id="n42022142"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022142">142</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here is <span class="greek">παιδίσκη</span> (<span class="translit">paidiskē</span>), referring to a slave girl or slave woman.</p></p>
<p id="n42022143"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022143">143</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he denied it, saying.” The referent (Peter) has been specified in the translation for clarity. The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42022144"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022144">144</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Woman</i> was a polite form of address (see BDAG 208-9 s.v. <span class="greek">γυνή</span>), similar to “Madam” or “Ma’am” used in English in different regions.</p></p>
<p id="n42022145"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022145">145</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression “<i>I do not know him</i>” had an idiomatic use in Jewish ban formulas in the synagogue and could mean, “I have nothing to do with him.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022146"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022146">146</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42022147"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022147">147</a> <p><b>sn</b> In Mark 14:69, the same slave girl made the charge. So apparently Peter was being identified by a variety of people.</p></p>
<p id="n42022148"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022148">148</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here and in v. 60 “Man” is used as a neutral form of address to a stranger.</p></p>
<p id="n42022149"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022149">149</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “insisted, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n42022150"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022150">150</a> <p><b>sn</b> According to Mark 14:70 it was Peter’s accent that gave him away as a <i>Galilean</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n42022151"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022151">151</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And immediately.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42022152"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022152">152</a> <p><b>tn</b> A real rooster crowing is probably in view here (rather than the Roman trumpet call known as <i>gallicinium</i>), in part due to the fact that Mark 14:72 mentions the rooster crowing twice. See the discussion at Matt 26:74.</p></p>
<p id="n42022153"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022153">153</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42022154"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022154">154</a> <p><b>tn</b> “The word of the Lord” is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; here and in Acts 11:16, 1 Pet 1:25) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; Acts 8:25; 13:44, 48, 49; 15:35, 36; 16:32; 19:10, 20; 1 Thess 1:8; 4:15; 2 Thess 3:1). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said. Because of its technical nature the expression has been retained in the translation in preference to a smoother rendering like “remembered what the Lord had said” (cf. TEV, NLT).</p></p>
<p id="n42022155"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022155">155</a> <p><b>sn</b> When Peter <i>went out and wept bitterly</i> it shows he really did not want to fail here and was deeply grieved that he had.</p></p>
<p id="n42022156"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022156">156</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic. </p></p>
<p id="n42022157"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022157">157</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42022158"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022158">158</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42022159"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022159">159</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἐπηρώτων</span> (<span class="translit">epērōtōn</span>) has been translated as an iterative imperfect. The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n42022160"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022160">160</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Who is the one who hit you?”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Who hit you?</i> This is a variation of one of three ancient games that involved blindfolds.</p></p>
<p id="n42022161"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022161">161</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “insulting.” Luke uses a strong word here; it means “to revile, to defame, to blaspheme” (L&amp;N 33.400).</p></p>
<p id="n42022162"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022162">162</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n42022163"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022163">163</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42022164"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022164">164</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42022165"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022165">165</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Their council</i> is probably a reference to the Jewish Sanhedrin, the council of seventy leaders.</p></p>
<p id="n42022166"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022166">166</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a first class condition in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n42022167"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022167">167</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n42022168"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022168">168</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a third class condition in the Greek text. Jesus had this experience already in 20:1-8.</p></p>
<p id="n42022169"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022169">169</a> <p><b>tn</b> The negation in the Greek text is the strongest possible (<span class="greek">οὐ μή</span>, <span class="translit">ou mē</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n42022170"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022170">170</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is also a third class condition in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n42022171"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022171">171</a> <p><b>tn</b> The negation in the Greek text is the strongest possible (<span class="greek">οὐ μή</span>, <span class="translit">ou mē</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n42022172"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022172">172</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>From now on</i>. Jesus’ authority was taken up from this moment on. Ironically he is now the ultimate judge, who is himself being judged.</p></p>
<p id="n42022173"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022173">173</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Seated at the right hand</i> is an allusion to Ps 110:1 (“Sit at my right hand…”) and is a claim that Jesus shares authority with God in heaven. Those present may have thought they were his judges, but, in fact, the reverse was true.</p></p>
<p id="n42022174"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022174">174</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>the right hand of the power of God</i> is a circumlocution for referring to God. Such indirect references to God were common in 1st century Judaism out of reverence for the divine name.</p></p>
<p id="n42022175"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022175">175</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Jesus’ pronouncement.</p></p>
<p id="n42022176"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022176">176</a> <p><b>sn</b> The members of the council understood the force of the claim and asked Jesus about another title, <i>Son of God</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n42022177"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022177">177</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022178"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022178">178</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ reply, “<i>You say that I am</i>,” was not a denial, but a way of giving a qualified positive response: “You have said it, but I do not quite mean what you think.”</p></p>
<p id="n42022179"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022179">179</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42022180"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022180">180</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>We have heard it ourselves</i>. The Sanhedrin regarded the answer as convicting Jesus. They saw it as blasphemous to claim such intimacy and shared authority with God, a claim so serious and convicting that no further testimony was needed.</p></p>
<p id="n42022181"><a href="file1037.xhtml#n42022181">181</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from his own mouth” (an idiom).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
