<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Philippians 2</h2>
<p id="n500021"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n500021">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “spiritual fellowship” if <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> (<span class="translit">pneumatos</span>) is an attributive genitive; or “fellowship brought about by the Spirit” if <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> is a genitive of source or production.</p></p>
<p id="n500022"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n500022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “affection and mercy.” The Greek idea, however, is best expressed by “or” in English. </p></p>
<p id="n500023"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n500023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and feel the same way,” “and think the same thoughts.” The <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clause has been translated “and be of the same mind” to reflect its epexegetical force to the imperative “complete my joy.” </p></p>
<p id="n500024"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n500024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word here is <span class="greek">σύμψυχοι</span> (<span class="translit">sumpsuchoi</span>, literally “fellow souled”). </p></p>
<p id="n500025"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n500025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not according to selfish ambition.” There is no main verb in this verse; the subjunctive <span class="greek">φρονῆτε</span> (<span class="translit">phronēte</span>, “be of the same mind”) is implied here as well. Thus, although most translations supply the verb “do” at the beginning of v. 3 (e.g., “do nothing from selfish ambition”), the idea is even stronger than that: “Don’t even <i>think</i> any thoughts motivated by selfish ambition.”</p></p>
<p id="n500026"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n500026">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the meaning “be concerned about” for <span class="greek">σκοπέω</span> (<span class="translit">skopeō</span>), see L&amp;N 27.36. </p></p>
<p id="n500027"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n500027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “only” is not in the Greek text, but is implied by the <span class="greek">ἀλλὰ καί</span> (<span class="translit">alla kai</span>) in the second clause (“but…as well”).</p></p>
<p id="n500028"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n500028">8</a> <p><b>tc</b> The bulk of the Western witnesses (D*<sup>,c</sup> F G K it) dropped <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) here, most likely due to ascetic concerns (the absence of the <span class="greek">καί</span> makes the statement express absolute self-denial). Strong external attestation for its inclusion from excellent witnesses as well as the majority (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 0278 33 1175 1241 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy) also marks it as autographic.</p><p><b>tn</b> Verses 1-4 constitute one long conditional sentence in Greek. The protasis is in verse 1, while vv. 2-4 constitute the apodosis. There is but one verb not in a subordinate clause in vv. 2-4, the imperative “complete” in v. 2. This is followed by a subjunctive after <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>, translated as an epexegetical clause, “and be of the same mind”) and three instrumental participles. Thus the focus of these four verses is to “be of the same mind” and all that follows this instruction is the means for accomplishing that. </p></p>
<p id="n500029"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n500029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Have this attitude in/among yourselves which also [was] in Christ Jesus,” or “Have this attitude in/among yourselves which [you] also [have] in Christ Jesus.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000210"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000210">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> This passage has been typeset as poetry because many scholars regard this passage as poetic or hymnic. These terms are used broadly to refer to the genre of writing, not to the content. There are two broad criteria for determining if a passage is poetic or hymnic: “(a) <i>stylistic:</i> a certain rhythmical lilt when the passages are read aloud, the presence of <i>parallelismus membrorum</i> (i.e., an arrangement into couplets), the semblance of some metre, and the presence of rhetorical devices such as alliteration, <i>chiasmus</i>, and antithesis; and (b) <i>linguistic:</i> an unusual vocabulary, particularly the presence of theological terms, which is different from the surrounding context” (P. T. O’Brien, <i>Philippians</i> [NIGTC], 188-89). Classifying a passage as hymnic or poetic is important because understanding this genre can provide keys to interpretation. However, not all scholars agree that the above criteria are present in this passage, so the decision to typeset it as poetry should be viewed as a tentative decision about its genre.</p></p>
<p id="n5000211"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000211">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek term translated <i>form</i> indicates a correspondence with reality. Thus the meaning of this phrase is that Christ was truly God.</p></p>
<p id="n5000212"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slaves” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n5000213"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by coming in the likeness of people.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The Greek expression underlying <i>by looking like other men</i> is similar to Paul’s wording in Rom 8:3 (“in the likeness of sinful flesh”). The same word “likeness” is used in both passages. It implies that there is a form that does not necessarily correspond to reality. In Rom 8:3, the meaning is that Christ <i>looked like</i> sinful humanity. Here the meaning is similar: Jesus <i>looked like</i> other <i>men</i> (note <span class="translit">anthrōpoi</span>), but was in fact different from them in that he did not have a sin nature.</p></p>
<p id="n5000214"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and by being found in form as a man.” The versification of vv. 7 and 8 (so also NRSV) is according to the versification in the NA<sup>28</sup> and UBS<sup>5</sup> editions of the Greek text. Some translations, however, break the verses in front of this phrase (NKJV, NASB, NIV, NLT). The same material has been translated in each case; the only difference is the versification of that material.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>By sharing in human nature</i>. This last line of v. 7 (line d) stands in tension with the previous line, line c (“by looking like other men”). Both lines have a word indicating form or likeness. Line c, as noted above, implies that Christ only <i>appeared</i> to be like other people. Line d, however, uses a different term that implies a correspondence between form and reality. Further, line c uses the plural “men” while line d uses the singular “man.” The theological point being made is that Christ looked just like other men, but he was not like other men (in that he was not sinful), though he was fully human.</p></p>
<p id="n5000215"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with fear and trembling.” The Greek words <span class="greek">φόβος</span> and <span class="greek">τρόμος</span> both imply fear in a negative sense (L&amp;N 25.251 and 16.6 respectively) while the former can also refer to respect and awe for deity (L&amp;N 53.59). Paul’s use of the terms in other contexts refers to “awe and reverence in the presence of God” (P. T. O’Brien, <i>Philippians</i> [NIGTC], 284; see discussion on 282-84). The translation “awe and reverence” was chosen to portray the attitude the believer should have toward God as they consider their behavior in light of God working through Jesus Christ (2:6-11) and in the believer’s life (2:13) to accomplish their salvation.</p></p>
<p id="n5000216"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “as stars in the universe.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000217"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “holding out, holding forth.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000218"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For I have no one who is like-minded who will genuinely be concerned for your welfare.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000219"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to see you” are not in the Greek text, but are implied, and are supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5000220"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But.” The temporal notion (“for now”) is implied in the epistolary aorist (“I have considered”), for Epaphroditus was dispatched with this letter to the Philippians.</p></p>
<p id="n5000221"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my brother” instead of “For he is my brother.” Verse 25 constitutes one sentence in Greek, with “my brother…” functioning appositionally to “Epaphroditus.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The reason why Paul refers to Epaphroditus as his <i>brother</i>, <i>coworker</i>, <i>fellow soldier</i>, etc., is because he wants to build up Epaphroditus in the eyes of the Philippians, since Paul is sending him back instead of Timothy. This accent on Epaphroditus’ character and service is implied in the translation “<i>For he is…</i>”</p></p>
<p id="n5000222"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “apostle.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000223"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word translated “minister” here is <span class="greek">λειτουργός</span> (<span class="translit">leitourgos</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n5000224"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “servant of my need.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000225"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For he became ill to the point of death.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000226"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I have sent him to you with earnestness.” But the epistolary aorist needs to be translated as a present tense with this adverb due to English stylistic considerations.</p></p>
<p id="n5000227"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “when you see him you can rejoice again.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000228"><a href="file1155.xhtml#n5000228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “make up for your lack of service to me.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
