<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 20</h2>
<p id="n400201"><a href="file989.xhtml#n400201">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>landowner</i> here refers to the owner and manager of a household.</p></p>
<p id="n400202"><a href="file989.xhtml#n400202">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “agreeing with the workers for a denarius a day.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>standard wage</i> was a denarius a day. The denarius was a silver coin worth about a day’s wage for a laborer in Palestine in the 1st century.</p></p>
<p id="n400203"><a href="file989.xhtml#n400203">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about the third hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n400204"><a href="file989.xhtml#n400204">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>marketplaces</i> in Matt 11:16.</p></p>
<p id="n400205"><a href="file989.xhtml#n400205">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400206"><a href="file989.xhtml#n400206">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he went out again about the sixth and ninth hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n400207"><a href="file989.xhtml#n400207">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about the eleventh hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n400208"><a href="file989.xhtml#n400208">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400209"><a href="file989.xhtml#n400209">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, six o’clock in the evening, the hour to pay day laborers. See Lev 19:13b.</p></p>
<p id="n4002010"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002010">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most witnesses, including several key <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B D N W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33<sup>vid</sup> 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy) have <span class="greek">αὐτοῖς</span> (<span class="translit">autois</span>, “to them”) after <span class="greek">ἀπόδος</span> (<span class="translit">apodos</span>, “give the pay”), but this may be a motivated reading, clarifying the indirect object. The support for the omission, however, is not nearly as strong (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C L Z 085 Or). Nevertheless, NA<sup>28</sup> includes the pronoun on the basis of the greater external attestation. A decision is difficult, but regardless of what is original, English style is better served with an explicit indirect object.</p></p>
<p id="n4002011"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002011">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “each received a denarius.” See the note on the phrase “standard wage” in v. 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4002012"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002012">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002013"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002013">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐγόγγυζον</span> (<span class="translit">egonguzon</span>) has been translated ingressively.</p></p>
<p id="n4002014"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002014">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the landowner) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4002015"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002015">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, he said to one of them.” This construction is somewhat redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4002016"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002016">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for a denarius a day.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002017"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002017">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002018"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002018">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this last one,” translated as “this last man” because field laborers in 1st century Palestine were men.</p></p>
<p id="n4002019"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002019">19</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Before <span class="greek">οὐκ</span> (<span class="translit">ouk</span>, “[am I] not”) a number of significant witnesses read <span class="greek">ἤ</span> (<span class="translit">ē</span>, “or”; e.g., <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C N W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 085 ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33 565 579 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat co). Although in later Greek the <span class="greek">οι</span> in <span class="greek">σοι</span> (<span class="translit">oi</span> in <span class="translit">soi</span>)—the last word of v. 14—would have been pronounced like <span class="greek">ἤ</span>, since <span class="greek">ἤ</span> is lacking in early <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B D; among later witnesses, note L Z <span class="greek">Θ</span> 700; SBL) and since <span class="smcaps">mss</span> were probably copied predominantly by sight rather than by sound, even into the later centuries, the omission of <span class="greek">ἤ</span> cannot be accounted for as easily. Thus the shorter reading most likely belongs to the <i>Ausgangstext</i>. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4002020"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002020">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Is your eye evil because I am good?”</p></p>
<p id="n4002021"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002021">21</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several key witnesses along with the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (e.g., B C N W <span class="greek">Δ</span> 085 33 565 579 700 1241 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy<sup>h</sup> sa<sup>mss</sup>) have <span class="greek">μαθητάς</span> (<span class="translit">mathētas</span>, “disciples”) after <span class="greek">τοὺς δώδεκα</span> (<span class="translit">tous dōdeka</span>, “the twelve”); still other authorities have <span class="greek">μαθητὰς αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">mathētas autou</span>, “his disciples”; <span class="greek">Γ</span> 13 892<sup>c</sup> 1424 it sy<sup>p</sup> sa<sup>mss</sup>) after <span class="greek">δώδεκα</span>. The personal pronoun is a clarifying addition, but all these <span class="smcaps">mss</span> also throw their weight toward the <span class="greek">μαθητάς</span> reading. Other significant witnesses lack the word (e.g. <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> D L <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 892* sy<sup>s,c</sup> bo Or). Up until this point in the Gospel, Matthew speaks of “the twelve” always with qualification (“twelve disciples,” “twelve apostles,” “these twelve”; cf. Matt 10:1, 2, 5; 11:1), but afterward just as “the twelve” (Matt 26:14, 20, 47). Thus, in spite of the strong external evidence, both longer variants look to be scribal clarifications, and hence are considered secondary. NA<sup>28</sup> puts <span class="greek">μαθητὰς</span> in brackets to show doubts about its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4002022"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002022">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4002023"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002023">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “scourged” (the term means to beat severely with a whip, L&amp;N 19.9). BDAG 620 s.v. <span class="greek">μαστιγόω</span> 1.a states, “The ‘verberatio’ is denoted in the passion predictions and explicitly as action by non-Israelites Mt 20:19; Mk 10:34; Lk 18:33”; the <i>verberatio</i> was the beating given to those condemned to death in the Roman judicial system. Here the term <span class="greek">μαστιγόω</span> (<span class="translit">mastigoō</span>) has been translated “flog…severely” to distinguish it from the term <span class="greek">φραγελλόω</span> (<span class="translit">phragelloō</span>) used in Matt 27:26; Mark 15:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4002024"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002024">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> Crucifixion was the cruelest form of punishment practiced by the Romans. Roman citizens could not normally undergo it. It was reserved for the worst crimes, like treason and evasion of due process in a capital case. The Roman historian Cicero called it “a cruel and disgusting penalty” (<i>Against Verres</i> 2.5.63-66 §§163-70); Josephus (<i>J. W</i>. 7.6.4 [7.203]) called it the worst of deaths.</p></p>
<p id="n4002025"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002025">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “yet” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4002026"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002026">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “asked something from him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002027"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002027">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002028"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002028">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Say that.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002029"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002029">29</a> <p><b>tc</b> A majority of witnesses read <span class="greek">σου</span> (<span class="translit">sou</span>, “your”) here, perhaps as a clarifying addition. At the same time, it is possible that the pronoun dropped out through haplography or was excised because of perceived redundancy (there are two other such pronouns in the verse) by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B. All things considered, <span class="greek">σου</span> is most likely authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n4002030"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002030">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, Jesus said.” This is somewhat redundant in English and has been simplified in the translation. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002031"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002031">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verbs in Greek are plural here, indicating that Jesus is not answering the mother but has turned his attention directly to the two disciples.</p></p>
<p id="n4002032"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002032">32</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (C N W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 33 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i>, as well as some versional and patristic authorities) add “or to be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized?” But this is surely due to a recollection of the fuller version of this dominical saying found in Mark 10:38. The same <span class="smcaps">mss</span> also have the Lord’s response, “and you will be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized” in v. 23, again due to the parallel in Mark 10:39. The shorter reading, in both v. 22 and v. 23, is to be preferred both because it better explains the rise of the other reading and is found in superior witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D L Z <span class="greek">Θ</span> 085 ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> lat sa, as well as other versional and patristic authorities).</p></p>
<p id="n4002033"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002033">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> No more naïve words have ever been spoken as those found here coming from James and John, “<i>We are able</i>.” They said it with such confidence and ease, yet they had little clue as to what they were affirming. In the next sentence Jesus confirms that they will indeed suffer for his name.</p></p>
<p id="n4002034"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002034">34</a> <p><b>tc</b> See the <b>tc</b> note on “about to drink” in v. 22. </p></p>
<p id="n4002035"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002035">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4002036"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002036">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ten.” </p></p>
<p id="n4002037"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002037">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “this” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4002038"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002038">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 8:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4002039"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002039">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek word for <i>ransom</i> (<span class="greek">λύτρον</span>, <span class="translit">lutron</span>) is found here and in Mark 10:45 and refers to the payment of a price in order to purchase the freedom of a slave. The idea of Jesus as the “ransom” is that he paid the price with his own life by standing in our place as a substitute, enduring the judgment that we deserved for sin.</p></p>
<p id="n4002041"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002041">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4002042"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002042">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “shouted, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant here in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002043"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002043">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Have mercy on us</i> is a request for healing. It is not owed to the men. They simply ask for God’s kind grace.</p></p>
<p id="n4002044"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002044">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> There was a tradition in Judaism that the Son of David (Solomon) had great powers of healing (Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 8.2.5 [8.42-49]).</p></p>
<p id="n4002045"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002045">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002046"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002046">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rebuked.” The crowd’s view was that surely Jesus would not be bothered with someone as unimportant as a blind beggar.</p></p>
<p id="n4002047"><a href="file989.xhtml#n4002047">47</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (C N W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 565 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> and several versional witnesses) read <span class="greek">κύριε</span> (<span class="translit">kurie</span>, “Lord”) after <span class="greek">ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">eleēson hēmas</span>, “have mercy on us”). But since this is the order of words in v. 30 (though that wording is also disputed), and since the <span class="greek">κύριε-</span>first reading enjoys widespread and early support (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D L Z <span class="greek">Θ</span> 085 0281 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 892 lat sy<sup>p</sup> sa<sup>mss</sup> bo; SBL), the latter was considered to be the earliest reading. However, the decision was by no means easy. NA<sup>28</sup> has <span class="greek">κύριε</span> after <span class="greek">ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς</span> here; a majority of that committee felt that since the placement of <span class="greek">κύριε</span> in last place was the nonliturgical order it “would have been likely to be altered in transcription to the more familiar sequence” (<i>TCGNT</i> 44).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
