<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 17</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 17</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Transfiguration </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:1</span> Six days later<sup><a id="n400171" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n400171">1</a></sup> Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John the brother of James,<sup><a id="n400172" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n400172">2</a></sup> and led them privately up a high mountain. <span class="verse">17:2</span> And he was transfigured before them.<sup><a id="n400173" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n400173">3</a></sup> His<sup><a id="n400174" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n400174">4</a></sup> face shone like the sun, and his clothes became white as light. <span class="verse">17:3</span> Then Moses<sup><a id="n400175" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n400175">5</a></sup> and Elijah<sup><a id="n400176" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n400176">6</a></sup> also appeared before them, talking with him. <span class="verse">17:4</span> So<sup><a id="n400177" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n400177">7</a></sup> Peter said<sup><a id="n400178" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n400178">8</a></sup> to Jesus, “Lord, it is good for us to be here. If you want, I will make<sup><a id="n400179" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n400179">9</a></sup> three shelters<sup><a id="n4001710" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001710">10</a></sup> —one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” <span class="verse">17:5</span> While he was still speaking, a<sup><a id="n4001711" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001711">11</a></sup> bright cloud<sup><a id="n4001712" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001712">12</a></sup> overshadowed<sup><a id="n4001713" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001713">13</a></sup> them, and a voice from the cloud said,<sup><a id="n4001714" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001714">14</a></sup> “This is my one dear Son,<sup><a id="n4001715" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001715">15</a></sup> in whom I take great delight. Listen to him!”<sup><a id="n4001716" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001716">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">17:6</span> When the disciples heard this, they were overwhelmed with fear and threw themselves down with their faces to the ground.<sup><a id="n4001717" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001717">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">17:7</span> But Jesus came and touched them. “Get up,” he said. “Do not be afraid.” <span class="verse">17:8</span> When<sup><a id="n4001718" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001718">18</a></sup> they looked up, all they saw was Jesus alone.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:9</span> As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them,<sup><a id="n4001719" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001719">19</a></sup> “Do not tell anyone about the vision until the Son of Man is raised from the dead.” <span class="verse">17:10</span> The disciples asked him,<sup><a id="n4001720" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001720">20</a></sup> “Why then do the experts in the law<sup><a id="n4001721" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001721">21</a></sup> say that Elijah must come first?” <span class="verse">17:11</span> He<sup><a id="n4001722" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001722">22</a></sup> answered, “Elijah does indeed come first and will restore all things. <span class="verse">17:12</span> And I tell you that Elijah has already come. Yet they did not recognize him, but did to him whatever they wanted. In<sup><a id="n4001723" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001723">23</a></sup> the same way, the Son of Man will suffer at their hands.” <span class="verse">17:13</span> Then the disciples understood that he was speaking to them about John the Baptist. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Disciples’ Failure to Heal </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:14</span> When<sup><a id="n4001724" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001724">24</a></sup> they came to the crowd, a man came to him, knelt before him, <span class="verse">17:15</span> and said, “Lord, have mercy on my son, because he has seizures<sup><a id="n4001725" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001725">25</a></sup> and suffers terribly, for he often falls into the fire and into the water. <span class="verse">17:16</span> I brought him to your disciples, but<sup><a id="n4001726" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001726">26</a></sup> they were not able to heal him.” <span class="verse">17:17</span> Jesus answered,<sup><a id="n4001727" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001727">27</a></sup> “You<sup><a id="n4001728" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001728">28</a></sup> unbelieving<sup><a id="n4001729" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001729">29</a></sup> and perverse generation! How much longer must I be with you? How much longer must I endure<sup><a id="n4001730" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001730">30</a></sup> you?<sup><a id="n4001731" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001731">31</a></sup> Bring him here to me.” <span class="verse">17:18</span> Then<sup><a id="n4001732" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001732">32</a></sup> Jesus rebuked<sup><a id="n4001733" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001733">33</a></sup> the demon and it came out of him, and the boy was healed from that moment. <span class="verse">17:19</span> Then the disciples came<sup><a id="n4001734" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001734">34</a></sup> to Jesus privately and said, “Why couldn’t we cast it out?” <span class="verse">17:20</span> He told them, “It was because of your little faith. I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4001735" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001735">35</a></sup> if you have faith the size of<sup><a id="n4001736" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001736">36</a></sup> a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move; nothing<sup><a id="n4001737" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001737">37</a></sup> will be impossible for you.”<sup><a id="n4001738" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001738">38</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Second Prediction of Jesus’ Death and Resurrection </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:22</span> When<sup><a id="n4001739" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001739">39</a></sup> they gathered together in Galilee, Jesus told them, “The Son of Man is going to be betrayed into the hands of men.<sup><a id="n4001740" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001740">40</a></sup> <span class="verse">17:23</span> They will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised.” And they became greatly distressed. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Temple Tax</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">17:24</span> After<sup><a id="n4001741" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001741">41</a></sup> they arrived in Capernaum,<sup><a id="n4001742" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001742">42</a></sup> the collectors of the temple tax<sup><a id="n4001743" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001743">43</a></sup> came to Peter and said, “Your teacher pays the double drachma tax, doesn’t he?” <span class="verse">17:25</span> He said, “Yes.” When Peter came into the house, Jesus spoke to him first,<sup><a id="n4001744" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001744">44</a></sup> “What do you think, Simon? From whom do earthly kings collect tolls or taxes—from their sons<sup><a id="n4001745" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001745">45</a></sup> or from foreigners?” <span class="verse">17:26</span> After he said, “From foreigners,” Jesus said to him, “Then the sons<sup><a id="n4001746" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001746">46</a></sup> are free. <span class="verse">17:27</span> But so that we don’t offend them, go to the lake and throw out a hook. Take the first fish that comes up, and when you open its mouth, you will find a four drachma coin.<sup><a id="n4001747" href="file986_notes.xhtml#n4001747">47</a></sup> Take that and give it to them for me and you.” </p>

</body>
</html>