<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Ephesians 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Ephesians<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Live in Love</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> Therefore, be<sup><a id="n490051" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n490051">1</a></sup> imitators of God as dearly loved children <span class="verse">5:2</span> and live<sup><a id="n490052" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n490052">2</a></sup> in love, just as Christ also loved us<sup><a id="n490053" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n490053">3</a></sup> and gave himself for us, a sacrificial and fragrant offering<sup><a id="n490054" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n490054">4</a></sup> to God. <span class="verse">5:3</span> But<sup><a id="n490055" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n490055">5</a></sup> among you there must not be either sexual immorality, impurity of any kind,<sup><a id="n490056" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n490056">6</a></sup> or greed, as these are not fitting for the saints.<sup><a id="n490057" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n490057">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:4</span> Neither should there be vulgar speech, foolish talk, or coarse jesting—all of which are out of character—but rather thanksgiving. <span class="verse">5:5</span> For you can be confident of this one thing:<sup><a id="n490058" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n490058">8</a></sup> that no person who is immoral, impure, or greedy (such a person is an idolater) has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Live in the Light</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:6</span> Let nobody deceive you with empty words, for because of these things God’s wrath comes on the sons of disobedience.<sup><a id="n490059" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n490059">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:7</span> Therefore do not be sharers with them,<sup><a id="n4900510" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900510">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:8</span> for you were at one time darkness, but now you are<sup><a id="n4900511" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900511">11</a></sup> light in the Lord. Live<sup><a id="n4900512" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900512">12</a></sup> like children of light— <span class="verse">5:9</span> for the fruit of the light<sup><a id="n4900513" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900513">13</a></sup> consists in<sup><a id="n4900514" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900514">14</a></sup> all goodness, righteousness, and truth— <span class="verse">5:10</span> trying to learn<sup><a id="n4900515" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900515">15</a></sup> what is pleasing to the Lord. <span class="verse">5:11</span> Do not participate in the unfruitful deeds of darkness, but rather<sup><a id="n4900516" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900516">16</a></sup> expose them.<sup><a id="n4900517" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900517">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:12</span> For the things they do<sup><a id="n4900518" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900518">18</a></sup> in secret are shameful even to mention. <span class="verse">5:13</span> But all things being exposed by the light are made visible. <span class="verse">5:14</span> For everything made visible is light, and for this reason it says:<sup><a id="n4900519" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900519">19</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">“Awake,<sup><a id="n4900520" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900520">20</a></sup> O sleeper!<sup><a id="n4900521" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900521">21</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">Rise from the dead,</p>
<p class="poetry">and Christ will shine on you!”<sup><a id="n4900522" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900522">22</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Live Wisely</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:15</span> Therefore consider carefully how you live—not as unwise but as wise, <span class="verse">5:16</span> taking advantage of every opportunity, because the days are evil. <span class="verse">5:17</span> For this reason do not be foolish, but be wise<sup><a id="n4900523" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900523">23</a></sup> by understanding<sup><a id="n4900524" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900524">24</a></sup> what the Lord’s will is. <span class="verse">5:18</span> And do not get drunk with wine, which<sup><a id="n4900525" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900525">25</a></sup> is debauchery,<sup><a id="n4900526" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900526">26</a></sup> but be filled by the Spirit,<sup><a id="n4900527" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900527">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:19</span> speaking to one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making music<sup><a id="n4900528" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900528">28</a></sup> in<sup><a id="n4900529" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900529">29</a></sup> your hearts to the Lord, <span class="verse">5:20</span> always giving thanks to God the Father for all things<sup><a id="n4900530" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900530">30</a></sup> in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, <span class="verse">5:21</span> and submitting to one another out of reverence for Christ.<sup><a id="n4900531" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900531">31</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortations to Households</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:22</span> <sup><a id="n4900532" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900532">32</a></sup> Wives, submit<sup><a id="n4900533" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900533">33</a></sup> to your husbands as to the Lord, <span class="verse">5:23</span> because the husband is the head of the wife as also Christ is the head of the church (he himself being the savior of the body). <span class="verse">5:24</span> But as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything. <span class="verse">5:25</span> Husbands, love your<sup><a id="n4900534" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900534">34</a></sup> wives just as Christ loved the church and gave himself for her <span class="verse">5:26</span> to sanctify her by cleansing her<sup><a id="n4900535" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900535">35</a></sup> with the washing of the water by the word, <span class="verse">5:27</span> so that he<sup><a id="n4900536" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900536">36</a></sup> may present the church to himself as glorious—not having a stain or wrinkle, or any such blemish, but holy and blameless.<sup><a id="n4900537" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900537">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:28</span> In the same way<sup><a id="n4900538" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900538">38</a></sup> husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself. <span class="verse">5:29</span> For no one has ever hated his own body,<sup><a id="n4900539" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900539">39</a></sup> but he feeds it and takes care of it, just as Christ also does the church, <span class="verse">5:30</span> because we are members of his body.<sup><a id="n4900540" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900540">40</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:31</span> <b><i>For</i></b> <b><i>this reason a man will leave his father and mother and will be joined to his wife, and the two will become</i></b><sup><a id="n4900541" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900541">41</a></sup> <i><b>one flesh.</b></i><sup><a id="n4900542" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900542">42</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:32</span> This mystery is great—but I am actually<sup><a id="n4900543" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900543">43</a></sup> speaking with reference to Christ and the church. <span class="verse">5:33</span> Nevertheless,<sup><a id="n4900544" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900544">44</a></sup> each one of you must also love his own wife as he loves himself,<sup><a id="n4900545" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900545">45</a></sup> and the wife must<sup><a id="n4900546" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900546">46</a></sup> respect<sup><a id="n4900547" href="file1151_notes.xhtml#n4900547">47</a></sup> her husband. </p>

</body>
</html>