<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Sower </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> On that day after Jesus went out of the house, he sat by the lake.<sup><a id="n400131" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n400131">1</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:2</span> And such a large crowd gathered around him that he got into a boat<sup><a id="n400132" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n400132">2</a></sup> to sit while<sup><a id="n400133" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n400133">3</a></sup> the whole crowd stood on the shore. <span class="verse">13:3</span> He<sup><a id="n400134" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n400134">4</a></sup> told them many things in parables,<sup><a id="n400135" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n400135">5</a></sup> saying: “Listen!<sup><a id="n400136" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n400136">6</a></sup> A sower went out to sow.<sup><a id="n400137" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n400137">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:4</span> And as he sowed, some seeds<sup><a id="n400138" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n400138">8</a></sup> fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured them. <span class="verse">13:5</span> Other<sup><a id="n400139" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n400139">9</a></sup> seeds fell on rocky ground<sup><a id="n4001310" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001310">10</a></sup> where they did not have much soil. They sprang up quickly because the soil was not deep.<sup><a id="n4001311" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001311">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:6</span> But when the sun came up, they were scorched, and because they did not have sufficient root, they withered. <span class="verse">13:7</span> Other seeds fell among the thorns,<sup><a id="n4001312" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001312">12</a></sup> and they grew up and choked them.<sup><a id="n4001313" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001313">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:8</span> But other seeds fell on good soil and produced grain, some a hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty. <span class="verse">13:9</span> The one who has ears had better listen!”<sup><a id="n4001314" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001314">14</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:10</span> Then<sup><a id="n4001315" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001315">15</a></sup> the disciples came to him and said, “Why do you speak to them in parables?” <span class="verse">13:11</span> He replied,<sup><a id="n4001316" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001316">16</a></sup> “You have been given<sup><a id="n4001317" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001317">17</a></sup> the opportunity to know<sup><a id="n4001318" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001318">18</a></sup> the secrets<sup><a id="n4001319" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001319">19</a></sup> of the kingdom of heaven, but they have not. <span class="verse">13:12</span> For whoever has will be given more, and will have an abundance. But whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.<sup><a id="n4001320" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001320">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:13</span> For this reason I speak to them in parables: Although they see they do not see, and although they hear they do not hear nor do they understand. <span class="verse">13:14</span> And concerning them the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled that says: </p>
<p class="otpoetry">‘<b><i>You will listen carefully</i></b><sup><a id="n4001321" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001321">21</a></sup> <b><i>yet</i> <i>will never understand,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>you will look closely</i></b><sup><a id="n4001322" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001322">22</a></sup> <i><b>yet will never comprehend</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">13:15</span> <b><i>For the heart of this people has become dull;</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>they are hard of hearing,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>and they have shut their eyes,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>so that they would not see with their eyes</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>and hear with their ears</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>and understand with their hearts</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>and turn, and I would heal them</b></i>.’<sup><a id="n4001323" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001323">23</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:16</span> “But your eyes are blessed<sup><a id="n4001324" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001324">24</a></sup> because they see, and your ears because they hear. <span class="verse">13:17</span> For I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4001325" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001325">25</a></sup> many prophets and righteous people longed to see<sup><a id="n4001326" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001326">26</a></sup> what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:18</span> “So listen to the parable of the sower: <span class="verse">13:19</span> When anyone hears the word about the kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one<sup><a id="n4001327" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001327">27</a></sup> comes and snatches what was sown in his heart;<sup><a id="n4001328" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001328">28</a></sup> this is the seed sown along the path. <span class="verse">13:20</span> The<sup><a id="n4001329" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001329">29</a></sup> seed sown on rocky ground<sup><a id="n4001330" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001330">30</a></sup> is the person who hears the word and immediately receives it with joy. <span class="verse">13:21</span> But he has no root in himself and does not endure;<sup><a id="n4001331" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001331">31</a></sup> when<sup><a id="n4001332" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001332">32</a></sup> trouble or persecution comes because of the word, immediately he falls away. <span class="verse">13:22</span> The<sup><a id="n4001333" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001333">33</a></sup> seed sown among thorns is the person who hears the word, but worldly cares and the seductiveness of wealth<sup><a id="n4001334" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001334">34</a></sup> choke the word,<sup><a id="n4001335" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001335">35</a></sup> so it produces nothing. <span class="verse">13:23</span> But as for the seed sown on good soil, this is the person who hears the word and understands. He bears fruit, yielding a hundred, sixty, or thirty times what was sown.”<sup><a id="n4001336" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001336">36</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Weeds</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:24</span> He presented them with another parable:<sup><a id="n4001337" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001337">37</a></sup> “The kingdom of heaven is like a person who sowed good seed in his field. <span class="verse">13:25</span> But while everyone was sleeping, an enemy came and sowed darnel<sup><a id="n4001338" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001338">38</a></sup> among the wheat and went away. <span class="verse">13:26</span> When<sup><a id="n4001339" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001339">39</a></sup> the plants sprouted and produced grain, then the darnel also appeared. <span class="verse">13:27</span> So the slaves<sup><a id="n4001340" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001340">40</a></sup> of the landowner<sup><a id="n4001341" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001341">41</a></sup> came and said to him, ‘Sir, didn’t you sow good seed in your field? Then where did the darnel come from?’ <span class="verse">13:28</span> He said, ‘An enemy has done this!’ So<sup><a id="n4001342" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001342">42</a></sup> the slaves replied, ‘Do you want us to go and gather it?’ <span class="verse">13:29</span> But he said, ‘No, since in gathering the darnel you may uproot the wheat along with it. <span class="verse">13:30</span> Let both grow together until the harvest. At<sup><a id="n4001343" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001343">43</a></sup> harvest time I will tell the reapers, “First collect the darnel and tie it in bundles to be burned, but then gather<sup><a id="n4001344" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001344">44</a></sup> the wheat into my barn.”’” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Mustard Seed </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:31</span> He gave<sup><a id="n4001345" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001345">45</a></sup> them another parable:<sup><a id="n4001346" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001346">46</a></sup> “The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed<sup><a id="n4001347" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001347">47</a></sup> that a man took and sowed in his field. <span class="verse">13:32</span> It is the smallest of all the seeds, but when it has grown it is the greatest garden plant and becomes a tree,<sup><a id="n4001348" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001348">48</a></sup> so that the wild birds<sup><a id="n4001349" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001349">49</a></sup> come and nest in its branches.”<sup><a id="n4001350" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001350">50</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Yeast </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:33</span> He told them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like yeast that a woman took and mixed with<sup><a id="n4001351" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001351">51</a></sup> three measures<sup><a id="n4001352" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001352">52</a></sup> of flour until all the dough had risen.”<sup><a id="n4001353" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001353">53</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Purpose of Parables </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:34</span> Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the crowds; he did not speak to them without a parable. <span class="verse">13:35</span> This fulfilled what was spoken by the prophet:<sup><a id="n4001354" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001354">54</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<b><i>I will open my mouth in parables,</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>I will announce what has been hidden from the foundation of the world</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4001355" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001355">55</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Explanation for the Disciples</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:36</span> Then he left the crowds and went into the house. And his disciples came to him saying, “Explain to us the parable of the darnel<sup><a id="n4001356" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001356">56</a></sup> in the field.” <span class="verse">13:37</span> He<sup><a id="n4001357" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001357">57</a></sup> answered, “The one who sowed the good seed is the Son of Man. <span class="verse">13:38</span> The field is the world and the good seed are the people<sup><a id="n4001358" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001358">58</a></sup> of the kingdom. The poisonous weeds<sup><a id="n4001359" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001359">59</a></sup> are the people<sup><a id="n4001360" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001360">60</a></sup> of the evil one, <span class="verse">13:39</span> and the enemy who sows them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels. <span class="verse">13:40</span> As<sup><a id="n4001361" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001361">61</a></sup> the poisonous weeds<sup><a id="n4001362" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001362">62</a></sup> are collected and burned with fire, so it will be at the end of the age. <span class="verse">13:41</span> The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather from his kingdom everything that causes sin as well as all lawbreakers.<sup><a id="n4001363" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001363">63</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:42</span> They will <b><i>throw</i></b> <b><i>them into the fiery furnace</i></b>,<sup><a id="n4001364" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001364">64</a></sup> where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. <span class="verse">13:43</span> Then <i>the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father</i>.<sup><a id="n4001365" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001365">65</a></sup> The one who has ears had better listen!<sup><a id="n4001366" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001366">66</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle"> Parables on the Kingdom of Heaven</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:44</span> “The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure, hidden in a field, that a person found and hid. Then because of joy he went and sold all that he had and bought that field. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:45</span> “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant searching for fine pearls. <span class="verse">13:46</span> When he found a pearl of great value, he went out and sold everything he had and bought it. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:47</span> “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was cast into the sea that caught all kinds of fish. <span class="verse">13:48</span> When it was full, they pulled it ashore, sat down, and put the good fish into containers and threw the bad away. <span class="verse">13:49</span> It will be this way at the end of the age. Angels will come and separate the evil from the righteous <span class="verse">13:50</span> and <i>throw</i> <i>them into the fiery furnace</i>,<sup><a id="n4001367" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001367">67</a></sup> where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:51</span> “Have you understood all these things?” They replied, “Yes.” <span class="verse">13:52</span> Then he said to them, “Therefore every expert in the law<sup><a id="n4001368" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001368">68</a></sup> who has been trained for the kingdom of heaven is like the owner of a house who brings out of his treasure what is new and old.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Rejection at Nazareth </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:53</span> Now when<sup><a id="n4001369" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001369">69</a></sup> Jesus finished these parables, he moved on from there. <span class="verse">13:54</span> Then<sup><a id="n4001370" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001370">70</a></sup> he came to his hometown<sup><a id="n4001371" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001371">71</a></sup> and began to teach the people<sup><a id="n4001372" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001372">72</a></sup> in their synagogue.<sup><a id="n4001373" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001373">73</a></sup> They<sup><a id="n4001374" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001374">74</a></sup> were astonished and said, “Where did this man get such wisdom and miraculous powers? <span class="verse">13:55</span> Isn’t this the carpenter’s son? Isn’t his mother named Mary?<sup><a id="n4001375" href="file982_notes.xhtml#n4001375">75</a></sup> And aren’t his brothers James, Joseph, Simon, and Judas? <span class="verse">13:56</span> And aren’t all his sisters here with us? So where did he get all this?” <span class="verse">13:57</span> And so they took offense at him. But Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his hometown and in his own house.” <span class="verse">13:58</span> And he did not do many miracles there because of their unbelief. </p>

</body>
</html>