<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 23</h2>
<p id="n400231"><a href="file992.xhtml#n400231">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400232"><a href="file992.xhtml#n400232">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n400233"><a href="file992.xhtml#n400233">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n400234"><a href="file992.xhtml#n400234">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for they say and do not do.”</p></p>
<p id="n400235"><a href="file992.xhtml#n400235">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400236"><a href="file992.xhtml#n400236">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400237"><a href="file992.xhtml#n400237">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Phylacteries</i> were small leather cases containing OT scripture verses, worn on the arm and forehead by Jews, especially when praying. The custom was derived from such OT passages as Exod 13:9; 16; Deut 6:8; 11:18.</p></p>
<p id="n400238"><a href="file992.xhtml#n400238">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">κράσπεδον</span> (<span class="translit">kraspedon</span>) in some contexts could refer to the outer fringe of the garment (possibly in Mark 6:56). This edge could have been plain or decorated. L&amp;N 6.180 states, “In Mt 23:5 <span class="greek">κράσπεδον</span> denotes the tassels worn at the four corners of the outer garment (see 6.194).”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Tassels</i> refer to the tassels that a male Israelite was obligated to wear on the four corners of his outer garment according to the Mosaic law (Num 15:38; Deut 22:12).</p></p>
<p id="n400239"><a href="file992.xhtml#n400239">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002310"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002310">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogues</i> in 4:23.</p></p>
<p id="n4002311"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002311">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is later Jewish material in the Talmud that spells out such <i>greetings</i> in detail. See H. Windisch, <i>TDNT</i> 1:498.</p></p>
<p id="n4002312"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002312">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>marketplaces</i> in Matt 11:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4002313"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4002314"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002315"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4002316"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Woe to you…because you…” The causal particle <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) has not been translated here for rhetorical effect (and so throughout this chapter).</p></p>
<p id="n4002317"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because you are closing the kingdom of heaven before people.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002318"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002318">18</a> <p><b>tc</b> Many of the most significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D L Z <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 892* and several versional witnesses) lack <b>23:14</b> “Woe to you experts in the law and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You devour widows’ property, and as a show you pray long prayers! Therefore you will receive a more severe punishment.” Part or all of the verse is contained (either after v. 12 or after v. 13) in W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 0102 0107 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> and several versions. Note also that Mark 12:40 and Luke 20:47 are very similar in wording and are not disputed textually. It is difficult to see this verse as authentic in Matthew in light of the two locations, variants withing this addition, and the key witnesses, early and diverse, that lack the verse itself. It almost certainly is not original. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number as well, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations. </p></p>
<p id="n4002319"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4002320"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “one proselyte.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002321"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “when he becomes [one].”</p></p>
<p id="n4002322"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a son of Gehenna.” Expressions constructed with <span class="greek">υἱός</span> (<span class="translit">huios</span>) followed by a genitive of class or kind denote a person belonging to the class or kind specified by the following genitive (L&amp;N 9.4). Thus the phrase here means “a person who belongs to hell.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>hell</i> in 5:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4002323"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Whoever swears by the temple, it is nothing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002324"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Whoever swears by the altar, it is nothing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002325"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4002326"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you tithe mint.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002327"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002327">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cumin</i> (alternately spelled <i>cummin</i>) was an aromatic herb native to the Mediterranean region. Its seeds were used for seasoning.</p></p>
<p id="n4002328"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002328">28</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Many witnesses (B C K L W <span class="greek">Δ</span> 0102 33 565 892 <i>pm</i>) have <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>, “but”) after <span class="greek">ταῦτα</span> (<span class="translit">tauta</span>, “these things”), while many others lack it (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> D <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 579 700 1241 1424 <i>pm</i> lat mae bo; SBL). Since asyndeton was relatively rare in Koine Greek, the conjunction may be an intentional scribal alteration, and is thus omitted from the present translation. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4002329"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Blind guides who strain out a gnat yet who swallow a camel!”</p></p>
<p id="n4002330"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002330">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4002331"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002331">31</a> <p><b>tc</b> A very difficult textual problem is found here. The most significant Alexandrian and Byzantine, as well as key Western, witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C L W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> 0102 0281 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 565 579 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat co; SBL) have “and the dish” (<span class="greek">καὶ τῆς παροψίδος</span>, <span class="translit">kai tēs paropsidos</span>) after “cup,” while a few major witnesses (D <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 700 and some versional and patristic authorities) omit the phrase. On the one hand, scribes sometimes tended to eliminate redundancy; since “and the dish” is already present in v. 25, it may have been deleted in v. 26 by well-meaning copyists. On the other hand, as Metzger notes, the singular pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">autou</span>, “its”) with <span class="greek">τὸ ἐκτός</span> (<span class="translit">to ektos</span>, “the outside”) in some of the same witnesses that have the longer reading (viz., B* ƒ<sup>13</sup> <i>al</i>) hints that their archetype lacked the words (<i>TCGNT</i> 50). Further, scribes would be motivated both to add the phrase from v. 25 <i>and</i> to change <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> to the plural pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτῶν</span> (<span class="translit">autōn</span>, “their”). Although the external evidence for the shorter reading is not compelling in itself, combined with these two prongs of internal evidence, it is to be slightly preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4002332"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002332">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4002333"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002333">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> This was an idiom for hypocrisy—just as the wall was painted on the outside but something different on the inside, so this person was not what he appeared or pretended to be (for discussion of a similar metaphor, see L&amp;N 88.234; BDAG 1010 s.v. <span class="greek">τοῖχος</span>). See Ezek 13:10-16; Acts 23:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4002334"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002334">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4002335"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002335">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Because you.” Here <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002336"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002336">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “the monuments” (see L&amp;N 7.75-76).</p></p>
<p id="n4002337"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002337">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fathers” (so also in v. 32).</p></p>
<p id="n4002338"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002338">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the judgment of Gehenna.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>hell</i> in 5:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4002339"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002339">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold I am sending.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4002340"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002340">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4002341"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002341">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>crucified</i> in 20:19.</p></p>
<p id="n4002342"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002342">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 620 s.v. <span class="greek">μαστιγόω</span> 1.a states, “of flogging as a punishment decreed by the synagogue (Dt 25:2f; s. the Mishna Tractate Sanhedrin-Makkoth, edited w. notes by SKrauss ’33) w. acc. of pers. Mt 10:17; 23:34.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002343"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002343">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogues</i> in 4:23.</p></p>
<p id="n4002344"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002344">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> Spelling of this name (<span class="greek">Βαραχίου</span>, <span class="translit">Barachiou</span>) varies among the English versions: “Barachiah” (RSV, NRSV); “Berechiah” (NASB); “Berachiah” (NIV). </p></p>
<p id="n4002345"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002345">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002346"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002346">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all these things will come on this generation.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002347"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002347">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> The double use of the city’s name betrays intense emotion.</p></p>
<p id="n4002348"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002348">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the opening address (“Jerusalem, Jerusalem”) is direct (second person), the remainder of this sentence in the Greek text is third person (“who kills the prophets and stones those sent to her”). The following sentences then revert to second person (“your…you”), so to keep all this consistent in English, the third person pronouns in the present verse were translated as second person (“you who kill…sent to you”).</p></p>
<p id="n4002349"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002349">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>How often I have longed to gather your children</i>. Jesus, like a lamenting prophet, speaks for God here, who longed to care tenderly for Israel and protect her.</p></p>
<p id="n4002350"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002350">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4002351"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002351">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you were not willing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002352"><a href="file992.xhtml#n4002352">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 118:26.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
