<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 3</h2>
<p id="n460031"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n460031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n460032"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n460032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fleshly [people]”; the Greek term here is <span class="greek">σαρκινός</span> (BDAG 914 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n460033"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n460033">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Milk</i> refers figuratively to basic or elementary Christian teaching. Paul’s point was that the Corinthian believers he was writing to here were not mature enough to receive more advanced teaching. This was not a problem at the time, when they were recent converts, but the problem now is that they <i>are still not ready</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n460034"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n460034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “are still merely human”; <i>Grk</i> “fleshly.” Cf. BDAG 914 s.v. <span class="greek">σαρκικός</span> 2, “pert. to being human at a disappointing level of behavior or characteristics, (merely) human.” The same phrase occurs again later in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n460035"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n460035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and walking in accordance with man,” i.e., living like (fallen) humanity without the Spirit’s influence; hence, “unregenerate people.”</p></p>
<p id="n460036"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n460036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “are you not men,” i.e., (fallen) humanity without the Spirit’s influence. Here Paul does not say “walking in accordance with” as in the previous verse; he actually states the Corinthians <i>are</i> this. However, this is almost certainly rhetorical hyperbole.</p></p>
<p id="n460037"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n460037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and to each as the Lord gave.”</p></p>
<p id="n460038"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n460038">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>I planted</i> is generally taken to mean that Paul founded the church at Corinth. Later <i>Apollos</i> had a significant ministry there (<i>watered</i>). See also v. 10.</p></p>
<p id="n460039"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n460039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is anything.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600310"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “are one.” The purpose of this phrase is to portray unified action on the part of ministers underneath God’s sovereign control. Although they are in fact individuals, they are used by God with a single purpose to accomplish his will in facilitating growth. This emphasis is brought out in the translation “work as one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600311"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although 1 Cor 3:9 is frequently understood to mean, “we are coworkers <i>with</i> God,” such a view assumes that the genitive <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">theou</span>) is associative because of its relationship to <span class="greek">συνεργοί</span> (<span class="translit">sunergoi</span>). However, not only is a genitive of association not required by the syntax (cf. <i>ExSyn</i> 130), but the context is decidedly against it: Paul and Apollos are insignificant compared to the God whom they serve (vv. 5-8).</p></p>
<p id="n4600312"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600312">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> The various materials described here, both valuable (<i>gold, silver, precious stones</i>) and worthless (<i>wood, hay, or straw</i>) refer to the quality of work built on the <i>foundation</i>, or possibly to the motivation of those doing the building. The materials themselves have been understood (1) as deeds or (2) as people (since ultimately the passage is addressing those who minister to others).</p></p>
<p id="n4600313"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “each one’s.” Here “builder’s” is employed in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4600314"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> In an attempt to clarify the referent, some translations add “of Christ” after “Day” (so TEV); others specify this as “judgment day” (NLT) or “the day of judgment” (CEV).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The Day</i> refers to the Day of the Lord Jesus Christ (cf. 1:8; 5:5) when each Christian worker will appear before Christ for evaluation of his ministry. Paul’s constant motivation was to be pleasing to the Lord in that day (2 Cor 5:9-10) and receive his commendation (1 Cor 4:5).</p></p>
<p id="n4600315"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600315">15</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ <span class="greek">αὐτό</span> (<span class="translit">auto</span>) is found at this point in v. 13 in a number of significant witnesses, including A B C P 33 1739 <i>al</i>. But <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0289 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt lack it. The pronoun could be a motivated reading, designed to intensify Paul’s statement. On the other hand, it could have been deleted because the article alone made the reference already clear. In this instance, the possibility of scribal addition seems more likely than scribal deletion, although a decision is difficult. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating doubt as to its authenticity.</p><p><b>sn</b> It is unclear whether the phrase <i>it will be revealed by fire</i> describes the Day (subject of the previous clause) or each one’s work (subject of the clause before that).</p></p>
<p id="n4600316"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “[will] <i>be punished</i>” is given here by BDAG 428 s.v. <span class="greek">ζημιόω</span> 2. But the next clause says “he will be delivered” and so “suffering loss” is more likely to refer to the destruction of the “work” by fire or the loss of the reward that could have been gained.</p></p>
<p id="n4600317"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600317">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>You are God’s temple</i> refers here to the church, since the pronoun <i>you</i> is plural in the Greek text. (In 6:19 the same imagery is used in a different context to refer to the individual believer.)</p></p>
<p id="n4600318"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let no one deceive himself.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600319"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600319">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Job 5:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4600320"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600320">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 94:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4600321"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so then, let no one boast in men.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600322"><a href="file1111.xhtml#n4600322">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cephas</i>. This individual is generally identified with the Apostle Peter (L&amp;N 93.211). Both the Aramaic name “Cephas” and the Greek name “Peter” are related to words in each language which mean “rock.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
