<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Timothy 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Timothy<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Timothy’s Ministry in the Later Times</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Now the Spirit explicitly says that in the later times some will desert the faith and occupy themselves<sup><a id="n540041" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n540041">1</a></sup> with deceiving spirits and demonic teachings,<sup><a id="n540042" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n540042">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:2</span> influenced by the hypocrisy of liars<sup><a id="n540043" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n540043">3</a></sup> whose consciences are seared.<sup><a id="n540044" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n540044">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:3</span> They will prohibit marriage and require abstinence from foods that God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth. <span class="verse">4:4</span> For every creation of God is good and no food<sup><a id="n540045" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n540045">5</a></sup> is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving. <span class="verse">4:5</span> For it is sanctified by God’s word and by prayer. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:6</span> By pointing out such things to the brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n540046" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n540046">6</a></sup> you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, having nourished yourself on the words of the faith and of the good teaching that you have followed.<sup><a id="n540047" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n540047">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:7</span> But reject those myths<sup><a id="n540048" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n540048">8</a></sup> fit only for the godless and gullible,<sup><a id="n540049" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n540049">9</a></sup> and train yourself for godliness. <span class="verse">4:8</span> For “physical exercise<sup><a id="n5400410" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400410">10</a></sup> has some value, but godliness is valuable in every way. It holds promise for the present life and for the life to come.” <span class="verse">4:9</span> This saying<sup><a id="n5400411" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400411">11</a></sup> is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance. <span class="verse">4:10</span> In fact this is why<sup><a id="n5400412" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400412">12</a></sup> we work hard and struggle,<sup><a id="n5400413" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400413">13</a></sup> because we have set our hope on the living God, who is the Savior of all people,<sup><a id="n5400414" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400414">14</a></sup> especially of believers. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:11</span> Command and teach these things. <span class="verse">4:12</span> Let no one look down on you because you are young, but set an example for the believers in your speech, conduct, love, faithfulness,<sup><a id="n5400415" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400415">15</a></sup> and purity. <span class="verse">4:13</span> Until I come, give attention to the public reading of scripture,<sup><a id="n5400416" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400416">16</a></sup> to exhortation, to teaching. <span class="verse">4:14</span> Do not neglect the spiritual gift you have,<sup><a id="n5400417" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400417">17</a></sup> given to you and confirmed by prophetic words<sup><a id="n5400418" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400418">18</a></sup> when the elders laid hands on you.<sup><a id="n5400419" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400419">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:15</span> Take pains with these things; be absorbed in them, so that everyone will see your progress.<sup><a id="n5400420" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400420">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:16</span> Be conscientious about how you live and what you teach.<sup><a id="n5400421" href="file1177_notes.xhtml#n5400421">21</a></sup> Persevere in this, because by doing so you will save both yourself and those who listen to you. </p>

</body>
</html>