<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 John 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>John<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Feeding of the Five Thousand </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> After this<sup><a id="n430061" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n430061">1</a></sup> Jesus went away to the other side of the Sea of Galilee (also called the Sea of Tiberias).<sup><a id="n430062" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n430062">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:2</span> A large crowd was following him because they were observing the miraculous signs he was performing on the sick. <span class="verse">6:3</span> So Jesus went on up the mountainside<sup><a id="n430063" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n430063">3</a></sup> and sat down there with his disciples. <span class="verse">6:4</span> (Now the Jewish Feast of the Passover<sup><a id="n430064" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n430064">4</a></sup> was near.)<sup><a id="n430065" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n430065">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:5</span> Then Jesus, when he looked up<sup><a id="n430066" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n430066">6</a></sup> and saw that a large crowd was coming to him, said to Philip, “Where can we buy bread so that these people may eat?” <span class="verse">6:6</span> (Now Jesus<sup><a id="n430067" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n430067">7</a></sup> said this to test him, for he knew what he was going to do.)<sup><a id="n430068" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n430068">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:7</span> Philip replied,<sup><a id="n430069" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n430069">9</a></sup> “200 silver coins worth<sup><a id="n4300610" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300610">10</a></sup> of bread would not be enough for them, for each one to get a little.” <span class="verse">6:8</span> One of Jesus’ disciples,<sup><a id="n4300611" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300611">11</a></sup> Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, said to him, <span class="verse">6:9</span> “Here is a boy who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what good<sup><a id="n4300612" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300612">12</a></sup> are these for so many people?” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:10</span> Jesus said, “Have<sup><a id="n4300613" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300613">13</a></sup> the people sit down.” (Now there was a lot of grass in that place.)<sup><a id="n4300614" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300614">14</a></sup> So the men<sup><a id="n4300615" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300615">15</a></sup> sat down, about 5,000 in number. <span class="verse">6:11</span> Then Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he distributed the bread to those who were seated. He then did the same with the fish,<sup><a id="n4300616" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300616">16</a></sup> as much as they wanted. <span class="verse">6:12</span> When they were all satisfied, Jesus<sup><a id="n4300617" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300617">17</a></sup> said to his disciples, “Gather up the broken pieces that are left over, so that nothing is wasted.” <span class="verse">6:13</span> So they gathered them up and filled twelve baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves<sup><a id="n4300618" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300618">18</a></sup> left over by the people who had eaten. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:14</span> Now when the people saw the miraculous sign that Jesus<sup><a id="n4300619" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300619">19</a></sup> performed, they began to say to one another, “This is certainly <i>the Prophet</i><sup><a id="n4300620" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300620">20</a></sup> <i>who is to come into the world</i>.”<sup><a id="n4300621" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300621">21</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:15</span> Then Jesus, because he knew they were going to come and seize him by force to make him king, withdrew again up the mountainside alone.<sup><a id="n4300622" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300622">22</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Walking on Water </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:16</span> Now when evening came, his disciples went down to the lake,<sup><a id="n4300623" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300623">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:17</span> got into a boat,<sup><a id="n4300624" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300624">24</a></sup> and started to cross the lake<sup><a id="n4300625" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300625">25</a></sup> to Capernaum.<sup><a id="n4300626" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300626">26</a></sup> (It had already become dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them.)<sup><a id="n4300627" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300627">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:18</span> By now a strong wind was blowing and the sea was getting rough. <span class="verse">6:19</span> Then, when they had rowed about three or four miles,<sup><a id="n4300628" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300628">28</a></sup> they caught sight of Jesus walking on the lake,<sup><a id="n4300629" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300629">29</a></sup> approaching the boat, and they were frightened. <span class="verse">6:20</span> But he said to them, “It is I. Do not be afraid.” <span class="verse">6:21</span> Then they wanted to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat came to the land where they had been heading. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:22</span> The next day the crowd that remained on the other side of the lake<sup><a id="n4300630" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300630">30</a></sup> realized that only one small boat<sup><a id="n4300631" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300631">31</a></sup> had been there, and that Jesus had not boarded<sup><a id="n4300632" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300632">32</a></sup> it with his disciples, but that his disciples had gone away alone. <span class="verse">6:23</span> Other boats from Tiberias came to shore<sup><a id="n4300634" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300634">34</a></sup> near the place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks.<sup><a id="n4300635" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300635">35</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:24</span> So when the crowd realized that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they got into the boats<sup><a id="n4300636" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300636">36</a></sup> and came to Capernaum<sup><a id="n4300637" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300637">37</a></sup> looking for Jesus. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Discourse About the Bread of Life</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:25</span> When they found him on the other side of the lake,<sup><a id="n4300638" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300638">38</a></sup> they said to him, “Rabbi, when did you get here?”<sup><a id="n4300639" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300639">39</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:26</span> Jesus replied,<sup><a id="n4300640" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300640">40</a></sup> “I tell you the solemn truth,<sup><a id="n4300641" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300641">41</a></sup> you are looking for me not because you saw miraculous signs, but because you ate all the loaves of bread you wanted.<sup><a id="n4300642" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300642">42</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:27</span> Do not work for the food that disappears,<sup><a id="n4300643" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300643">43</a></sup> but for the food that remains to eternal life—the food<sup><a id="n4300644" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300644">44</a></sup> which the Son of Man will give to you. For God the Father has put his seal of approval on him.”<sup><a id="n4300645" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300645">45</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:28</span> So then they said to him, “What must we do to accomplish the deeds<sup><a id="n4300646" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300646">46</a></sup> God requires?”<sup><a id="n4300647" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300647">47</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:29</span> Jesus replied,<sup><a id="n4300648" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300648">48</a></sup> “This is the deed<sup><a id="n4300649" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300649">49</a></sup> God requires<sup><a id="n4300650" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300650">50</a></sup> —to believe in the one whom he<sup><a id="n4300651" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300651">51</a></sup> sent.” <span class="verse">6:30</span> So they said to him, “Then what miraculous sign will you perform, so that we may see it and believe you? What will you do? <span class="verse">6:31</span> Our ancestors<sup><a id="n4300652" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300652">52</a></sup> ate the manna in the wilderness, just as it is written, ‘<b><i>He gave them bread from heaven to eat</i></b>.’”<sup><a id="n4300653" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300653">53</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:32</span> Then Jesus told them, “I tell you the solemn truth,<sup><a id="n4300654" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300654">54</a></sup> it is not Moses who has given you the bread from heaven, but my Father is giving you the true bread from heaven. <span class="verse">6:33</span> For the bread of God is the one who<sup><a id="n4300655" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300655">55</a></sup> comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.” <span class="verse">6:34</span> So they said to him, “Sir,<sup><a id="n4300656" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300656">56</a></sup> give us this bread all the time!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:35</span> Jesus said to them, “I am the bread of life. The one who comes to me will never go hungry, and the one who believes in me will never be thirsty.<sup><a id="n4300657" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300657">57</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:36</span> But I told you<sup><a id="n4300658" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300658">58</a></sup> that you have seen me<sup><a id="n4300659" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300659">59</a></sup> and still do not believe. <span class="verse">6:37</span> Everyone whom the Father gives me will come to me, and the one who comes to me I will never send away.<sup><a id="n4300660" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300660">60</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:38</span> For I have come down from heaven not to do my own will but the will of the one who sent me. <span class="verse">6:39</span> Now this is the will of the one who sent me—that I should not lose one person of every one he has given me, but raise them all up<sup><a id="n4300661" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300661">61</a></sup> at the last day. <span class="verse">6:40</span> For this is the will of my Father—for everyone who looks on the Son and believes in him to have eternal life, and I will raise him up<sup><a id="n4300662" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300662">62</a></sup> at the last day.”<sup><a id="n4300663" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300663">63</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:41</span> Then the Jews who were hostile to Jesus<sup><a id="n4300664" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300664">64</a></sup> began complaining about him because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven,” <span class="verse">6:42</span> and they said, “Isn’t this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How can he now say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?” <span class="verse">6:43</span> Jesus replied,<sup><a id="n4300665" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300665">65</a></sup> “Do not complain about me to one another.<sup><a id="n4300666" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300666">66</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:44</span> No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him,<sup><a id="n4300667" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300667">67</a></sup> and I will raise him up at the last day. <span class="verse">6:45</span> It is written in the prophets, ‘<b><i>And they will all be taught by God</i></b>.’<sup><a id="n4300668" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300668">68</a></sup> Everyone who hears and learns from the Father<sup><a id="n4300669" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300669">69</a></sup> comes to me. <span class="verse">6:46</span> (Not that anyone has seen the Father except the one who is from God—he<sup><a id="n4300670" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300670">70</a></sup> has seen the Father.)<sup><a id="n4300671" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300671">71</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:47</span> I tell you the solemn truth,<sup><a id="n4300672" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300672">72</a></sup> the one who believes<sup><a id="n4300673" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300673">73</a></sup> has eternal life.<sup><a id="n4300674" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300674">74</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:48</span> I am the bread of life.<sup><a id="n4300675" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300675">75</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:49</span> Your ancestors<sup><a id="n4300676" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300676">76</a></sup> ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died. <span class="verse">6:50</span> This<sup><a id="n4300677" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300677">77</a></sup> is the bread that has come down from heaven, so that a person<sup><a id="n4300678" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300678">78</a></sup> may eat from it and not die. <span class="verse">6:51</span> I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats from this bread he will live forever. The bread<sup><a id="n4300679" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300679">79</a></sup> that I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:52</span> Then the Jews who were hostile to Jesus<sup><a id="n4300680" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300680">80</a></sup> began to argue with one another,<sup><a id="n4300681" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300681">81</a></sup> “How can this man<sup><a id="n4300682" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300682">82</a></sup> give us his flesh to eat?” <span class="verse">6:53</span> Jesus said to them, “I tell you the solemn truth,<sup><a id="n4300683" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300683">83</a></sup> unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood,<sup><a id="n4300684" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300684">84</a></sup> you have no life<sup><a id="n4300685" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300685">85</a></sup> in yourselves. <span class="verse">6:54</span> The one who eats<sup><a id="n4300686" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300686">86</a></sup> my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.<sup><a id="n4300687" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300687">87</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:55</span> For my flesh is true<sup><a id="n4300688" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300688">88</a></sup> food, and my blood is true<sup><a id="n4300689" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300689">89</a></sup> drink. <span class="verse">6:56</span> The one who eats<sup><a id="n4300690" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300690">90</a></sup> my flesh and drinks my blood resides in me, and I in him.<sup><a id="n4300691" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300691">91</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:57</span> Just as the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so the one who consumes<sup><a id="n4300692" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300692">92</a></sup> me will live because of me. <span class="verse">6:58</span> This<sup><a id="n4300693" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300693">93</a></sup> is the bread that came down from heaven; it is not like the bread your ancestors<sup><a id="n4300694" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300694">94</a></sup> ate, but then later died.<sup><a id="n4300695" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300695">95</a></sup> The one who eats<sup><a id="n4300696" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300696">96</a></sup> this bread will live forever.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Many Followers Depart</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:59</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4300697" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300697">97</a></sup> said these things while he was teaching in the synagogue<sup><a id="n4300698" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300698">98</a></sup> in Capernaum.<sup><a id="n4300699" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n4300699">99</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:60</span> Then many of his disciples, when they heard these things,<sup><a id="n43006100" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006100">100</a></sup> said, “This is a difficult<sup><a id="n43006101" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006101">101</a></sup> saying!<sup><a id="n43006102" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006102">102</a></sup> Who can understand it?”<sup><a id="n43006103" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006103">103</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:61</span> When Jesus was aware<sup><a id="n43006104" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006104">104</a></sup> that his disciples were complaining<sup><a id="n43006105" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006105">105</a></sup> about this, he said to them, “Does this cause you to be offended?<sup><a id="n43006106" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006106">106</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:62</span> Then what if you see the Son of Man ascending where he was before?<sup><a id="n43006107" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006107">107</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:63</span> The Spirit is the one who gives life; human nature is of no help!<sup><a id="n43006108" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006108">108</a></sup> The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and are life.<sup><a id="n43006109" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006109">109</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:64</span> But there are some of you who do not believe.” (For Jesus had already known from the beginning who those were who did not believe, and who it was who would betray him.)<sup><a id="n43006110" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006110">110</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:65</span> So Jesus added,<sup><a id="n43006111" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006111">111</a></sup> “Because of this I told you that no one can come to me unless the Father has allowed him to come.”<sup><a id="n43006112" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006112">112</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Peter’s Confession</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:66</span> After this many of his disciples quit following him<sup><a id="n43006113" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006113">113</a></sup> and did not accompany him<sup><a id="n43006114" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006114">114</a></sup> any longer. <span class="verse">6:67</span> So Jesus said to the twelve, “You don’t want to go away too, do you?”<sup><a id="n43006115" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006115">115</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:68</span> Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life. <span class="verse">6:69</span> We<sup><a id="n43006116" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006116">116</a></sup> have come to believe and to know<sup><a id="n43006117" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006117">117</a></sup> that you are the Holy One of God!”<sup><a id="n43006118" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006118">118</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:70</span> Jesus replied,<sup><a id="n43006119" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006119">119</a></sup> “Didn’t I choose you, the twelve, and yet one of you is the devil?”<sup><a id="n43006120" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006120">120</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:71</span> (Now he said this about Judas son of Simon Iscariot,<sup><a id="n43006121" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006121">121</a></sup> for Judas,<sup><a id="n43006122" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006122">122</a></sup> one of the twelve, was going to betray him.)<sup><a id="n43006123" href="file1046_notes.xhtml#n43006123">123</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>