<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 9</h2>
<p id="n460091"><a href="file1117.xhtml#n460091">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the seal.”</p></p>
<p id="n460092"><a href="file1117.xhtml#n460092">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the right to eat and drink.” In the context this is a figurative reference to financial support.</p></p>
<p id="n460093"><a href="file1117.xhtml#n460093">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cephas</i>. This individual is generally identified with the Apostle Peter (L&amp;N 93.211). Both the Aramaic name “Cephas” and the Greek name “Peter” are related to words in each language which mean “rock.”</p></p>
<p id="n460094"><a href="file1117.xhtml#n460094">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “only according to human authority”; <i>Grk</i> “saying these things according to men.”</p></p>
<p id="n460095"><a href="file1117.xhtml#n460095">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 25:4.</p></p>
<p id="n460096"><a href="file1117.xhtml#n460096">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “working the sacred things.”</p></p>
<p id="n460097"><a href="file1117.xhtml#n460097">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that it will happen in this way in my case.”</p></p>
<p id="n460098"><a href="file1117.xhtml#n460098">8</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading <span class="greek">ἤ</span>—<span class="greek">τὸ καύχημά μου οὐδεὶς κενώσει</span> (<span class="translit">ē</span>—<span class="translit">to kauchēma mou oudeis kenōsei</span>, “than—no one will deprive me of my reason for boasting!”) is syntactically abrupt, but fully in keeping with Pauline style. It is supported by <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B D*<sup>,c</sup> 33 1739 1881 as well as early patristic authors. Most witnesses, especially the later ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> C D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), have a significantly smoother reading than this: <span class="greek">ἢ</span> <span class="greek">τὸ καύχημά μου ἵνα τις κενώσῃ</span> (or <span class="greek">κενώσει</span>); <span class="translit">ē to kauchēma mou hina tis kenōsē</span> (or <span class="translit">kenōsei</span>), “than that anyone should deprive me of my boasting.” The simple replacement of <span class="greek">οὐδείς</span> with <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> essentially accomplishes the smoothing out of the text, and as such the <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> reading is suspect. Not only is the harder reading in keeping with Pauline style, but it is also found in the earlier and better witnesses.</p><p><b>sn</b> Paul breaks off his thought at mid-sentence (indicated by the dash in the translation) and it is somewhat difficult to determine his <i>reason for boasting</i>. Most likely Paul would rather die than be deprived of the boast that he had offered the gospel free of charge even though as an apostle he had the right to such support (9:14). Did he say this as a way of criticizing his opponents? Perhaps only indirectly. His focus has more to do with not hindering the gospel than what his opponents were doing (9:12). </p></p>
<p id="n460099"><a href="file1117.xhtml#n460099">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “more converts.” The word “people” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. It has been supplied in the translation to clarify the meaning.</p></p>
<p id="n4600910"><a href="file1117.xhtml#n4600910">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Byzantine text, as well as a few other witnesses (D<sup>2</sup> [L] <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) lack this parenthetical material, while geographically widespread, early, and diverse witnesses have the words (so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C D* F G P 33 104 365 1175 1505 1739 <i>al</i> latt). The phrase may have dropped out accidentally through homoioteleuton (note that both the preceding phrase and the parenthesis end in <span class="greek">ὑπὸ νόμον</span> [<span class="translit">hupo nomon</span>, “under the law”]), or intentionally by overscrupulous scribes who felt that the statement “I myself am not under the law” could have led to license.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
