<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Thessalonians 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Thessalonians<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Day of the Lord</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> Now regarding the arrival<sup><a id="n530021" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n530021">1</a></sup> of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered to be with him,<sup><a id="n530022" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n530022">2</a></sup> we ask you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n530023" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n530023">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:2</span> not to be easily<sup><a id="n530024" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n530024">4</a></sup> shaken from your composure or disturbed by any kind of spirit or message or letter allegedly from us,<sup><a id="n530025" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n530025">5</a></sup> to the effect that the day of the Lord is already here. <span class="verse">2:3</span> Let no one deceive you in any way. For that day will not arrive until the rebellion comes<sup><a id="n530026" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n530026">6</a></sup> and the man of lawlessness<sup><a id="n530027" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n530027">7</a></sup> is revealed, the son of destruction.<sup><a id="n530028" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n530028">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:4</span> He<sup><a id="n530029" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n530029">9</a></sup> opposes <i>and</i> <i>exalts himself above every</i> so-called <i>god</i> or object of worship, and as a result <i>he takes his seat</i><sup><a id="n5300210" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300210">10</a></sup> in God’s temple, displaying himself as God.<sup><a id="n5300211" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300211">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:5</span> Surely you recall<sup><a id="n5300212" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300212">12</a></sup> that I used to tell you these things while I was still with you. <span class="verse">2:6</span> And so<sup><a id="n5300213" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300213">13</a></sup> you know what holds him back,<sup><a id="n5300214" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300214">14</a></sup> so that he will be revealed in his own time. <span class="verse">2:7</span> For the hidden power of lawlessness<sup><a id="n5300215" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300215">15</a></sup> is already at work. However, the one who holds him back<sup><a id="n5300216" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300216">16</a></sup> will do so until he is taken out of the way, <span class="verse">2:8</span> and then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord<sup><a id="n5300217" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300217">17</a></sup> will destroy by the breath of his mouth and wipe out by the manifestation of his arrival. <span class="verse">2:9</span> The arrival of the lawless one<sup><a id="n5300218" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300218">18</a></sup> will be by Satan’s working with all kinds of miracles<sup><a id="n5300219" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300219">19</a></sup> and signs and false wonders, <span class="verse">2:10</span> and with every kind of evil deception directed against<sup><a id="n5300220" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300220">20</a></sup> those who are perishing, because they found no place in their hearts for the truth<sup><a id="n5300221" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300221">21</a></sup> so as to be saved. <span class="verse">2:11</span> Consequently<sup><a id="n5300222" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300222">22</a></sup> God sends on them a deluding influence<sup><a id="n5300223" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300223">23</a></sup> so that they will believe what is false. <span class="verse">2:12</span> And so<sup><a id="n5300224" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300224">24</a></sup> all of them who have not believed the truth but have delighted in evil will be condemned.<sup><a id="n5300225" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300225">25</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Call to Stand Firm</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:13</span> But we ought to thank God always for you, brothers and sisters<sup><a id="n5300226" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300226">26</a></sup> loved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning<sup><a id="n5300227" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300227">27</a></sup> for salvation through sanctification by the Spirit and faith in the truth. <span class="verse">2:14</span> He called you to this salvation<sup><a id="n5300228" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300228">28</a></sup> through our gospel, so that you may possess the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.<sup><a id="n5300229" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300229">29</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:15</span> Therefore, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5300230" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300230">30</a></sup> stand firm and hold on to the traditions that we taught you, whether by speech or by letter.<sup><a id="n5300231" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300231">31</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:16</span> Now may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and by grace gave us eternal comfort and good hope, <span class="verse">2:17</span> encourage your hearts and strengthen you<sup><a id="n5300232" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300232">32</a></sup> in every good thing you do or say.<sup><a id="n5300233" href="file1171_notes.xhtml#n5300233">33</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>