<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Titus 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Titus<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul,<sup><a id="n560011" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n560011">1</a></sup> a slave<sup><a id="n560012" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n560012">2</a></sup> of God and apostle of Jesus Christ, to further the faith<sup><a id="n560013" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n560013">3</a></sup> of God’s chosen ones and the knowledge of the truth that is in keeping with godliness, <span class="verse">1:2</span> in hope of eternal life, which God, who does not lie, promised before time began.<sup><a id="n560014" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n560014">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:3</span> But now in his own time<sup><a id="n560015" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n560015">5</a></sup> he has made his message evident through the preaching I was entrusted with according to the command of God our Savior. <span class="verse">1:4</span> To Titus, my genuine son in a common faith. Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Titus’ Task on Crete</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:5</span> The reason I left you in Crete was to set in order the remaining matters and to appoint elders in every town, as I directed you. <span class="verse">1:6</span> An elder must be blameless,<sup><a id="n560016" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n560016">6</a></sup> the husband of one wife,<sup><a id="n560017" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n560017">7</a></sup> with faithful children<sup><a id="n560018" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n560018">8</a></sup> who cannot be charged with dissipation or rebellion. <span class="verse">1:7</span> For the overseer<sup><a id="n560019" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n560019">9</a></sup> must be blameless as one entrusted with God’s work,<sup><a id="n5600110" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n5600110">10</a></sup> not arrogant, not prone to anger, not a drunkard, not violent, not greedy for gain. <span class="verse">1:8</span> Instead he must be hospitable, devoted to what is good, sensible, upright, devout, and self-controlled. <span class="verse">1:9</span> He must hold firmly to the faithful message as it has been taught,<sup><a id="n5600111" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n5600111">11</a></sup> so that he will be able to give exhortation in such healthy teaching<sup><a id="n5600112" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n5600112">12</a></sup> and correct those who speak against it.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:10</span> For there are many<sup><a id="n5600113" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n5600113">13</a></sup> rebellious people, idle talkers, and deceivers, especially those with Jewish connections,<sup><a id="n5600114" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n5600114">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:11</span> who must be silenced because they mislead whole families by teaching for dishonest gain what ought not to be taught. <span class="verse">1:12</span> A certain one of them, in fact, one of their own prophets, said, “Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy gluttons.”<sup><a id="n5600115" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n5600115">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:13</span> Such testimony is true. For this reason rebuke them sharply that they may be healthy in the faith <span class="verse">1:14</span> and not pay attention to Jewish myths<sup><a id="n5600116" href="file1186_notes.xhtml#n5600116">16</a></sup> and commands of people who reject the truth. <span class="verse">1:15</span> All is pure to those who are pure. But to those who are corrupt and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but both their minds and consciences are corrupted. <span class="verse">1:16</span> They profess to know God but with their deeds they deny him, since they are detestable, disobedient, and unfit for any good deed. </p>

</body>
</html>