<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Corinthians 6</h2>
<p id="n470061"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n470061">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “receive the grace of God uselessly.”</p></p>
<p id="n470062"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n470062">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 49:8.</p></p>
<p id="n470063"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n470063">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “anyone” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects in Greek were often omitted when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n470064"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n470064">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Other interpretations of the first part of 2 Cor 6:3 are possible. The phrase could also mean, “not putting an obstacle in the way of anyone” (L&amp;N 22.14), or “giving no one in anything a cause to sin” (L&amp;N 88.307).</p></p>
<p id="n470065"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n470065">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “ministers.”</p></p>
<p id="n470066"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n470066">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “we have commended ourselves by all things.”</p></p>
<p id="n470067"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n470067">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in trouble and suffering.”</p></p>
<p id="n470068"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n470068">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rebellions” (uprisings in open defiance of civil authority).</p></p>
<p id="n470069"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n470069">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Usually <span class="greek">κόποις</span> (<span class="translit">kopois</span>) has been translated as “labors” or “hard work,” but see Matt 26:10 where it means “trouble”; “distress” (L&amp;N 22.7). In this context with so many other terms denoting suffering and difficulty, such a meaning is preferable.</p></p>
<p id="n4700610"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “by holiness of spirit.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700611"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sincere.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700612"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the word of truth”; understanding <span class="greek">ἀληθείας</span> (<span class="translit">alētheias</span>) as an attributive genitive (“truthful word”).</p></p>
<p id="n4700613"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “speech.” In this context it is more likely that <span class="greek">λόγος</span> (<span class="translit">logos</span>) refers to Paul’s message (thus “teaching”) than to his speech in general.</p></p>
<p id="n4700614"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “for the right hand and for the left” possibly refers to a combination of an offensive weapon (a sword for the right hand) and a defensive weapon (a shield for the left).</p></p>
<p id="n4700615"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “regarded as deceivers.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700616"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “disciplined,” but in this context probably a reference to scourging prior to execution (yet the execution is not carried out).</p></p>
<p id="n4700617"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “our mouth has been open to you,” an idiom for openness in communication.</p></p>
<p id="n4700618"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “You are not restricted by us.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700619"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “my” is not in the Greek text but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4700620"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to us” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4700621"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Do not be mismatched.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700622"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700622">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">Βελιάρ</span> (<span class="translit">Beliar</span>) is a spelling variant for <span class="greek">Βελιάλ</span> (<span class="translit">Belial</span>, see Judg 20:13 LXX). It occurs only here in the NT. <i>Beliar</i> is a reference to Satan.</p></p>
<p id="n4700623"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700623">23</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including some significant ones (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> C D<sup>2</sup> F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0209 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy Tert), read <span class="greek">ὑμεῖς</span>…<span class="greek">ἐστε</span> (<span class="translit">humeis</span>…<span class="translit">este</span>, “you are”) instead of <span class="greek">ἡμεῖς</span>…<span class="greek">ἐσμεν</span> (<span class="translit">hēmeis</span>…<span class="translit">esmen</span>, “we are”) here, but several other early and significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B D* L P 0243 6 33 81 326 365 1175 1739 1881 2464 co Cl Or) have <span class="greek">ἡμεῖς</span>…<span class="greek">ἐσμεν</span>. The external evidence is somewhat in favor of the first person pronoun and verb; the internal evidence weighs in even stronger. In light of the parallel in 1 Cor 3:16, where Paul uses <span class="greek">ἐστε</span> (“<i>you are</i> the temple of God”), as well as the surrounding context here in which the second person verb or pronoun is used in vv. 14, 17, and 18, the second person reading seems obviously motivated. The first person reading can explain the rise of the other reading, but the reverse is not as easily done. Consequently, the first person reading of <span class="greek">ἡμεῖς</span>…<span class="greek">ἐσμεν</span> has all the credentials of authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4700624"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “live among them,” “live with them.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>I will live in them</i>. The OT text that lies behind this passage (Lev 26:11-12) speaks of God dwelling in the midst of his people. The Greek preposition <span class="translit">en</span> in the phrase <span class="translit">en autois</span> (“in them”) can also have that meaning (“among” or “with”). However, Paul appears to be extending the imagery here to involve God (as the Spirit) dwelling <i>in</i> his people, since he calls believers “the temple of the living God” in the previous clause, imagery he uses elsewhere in his writings (1 Cor 3:16; Eph 2:21-22).</p></p>
<p id="n4700625"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700625">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 26:12; also similar to Jer 32:38; Ezek 37:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4700626"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700626">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 52:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4700627"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will receive.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700628"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700628">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> A paraphrased quotation from Ezek 20:41.</p></p>
<p id="n4700629"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700629">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> A paraphrased quotation from 2 Sam 7:14 and Isa 43:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4700630"><a href="file1131.xhtml#n4700630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “the Lord Almighty.” BDAG 755 s.v. <span class="greek">παντοκράτωρ</span> states, “the <i>Almighty, All-Powerful, Omnipotent</i> (<i>One</i>) only of God…<span class="greek">κύριος π</span>. (oft. LXX) 2 Cor 6:18.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
