<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Corinthians 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Corinthians<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul and His Opponents</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:1</span> I wish that you would be patient with me in a little foolishness, but indeed you are being patient with me! <span class="verse">11:2</span> For I am jealous for you with godly jealousy, because I promised you in marriage to one husband,<sup><a id="n470111" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n470111">1</a></sup> to present you as a pure<sup><a id="n470112" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n470112">2</a></sup> virgin to Christ. <span class="verse">11:3</span> But I am afraid that<sup><a id="n470113" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n470113">3</a></sup> just as the serpent<sup><a id="n470114" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n470114">4</a></sup> deceived Eve by his treachery,<sup><a id="n470115" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n470115">5</a></sup> your minds may be led astray<sup><a id="n470116" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n470116">6</a></sup> from a sincere and pure<sup><a id="n470117" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n470117">7</a></sup> devotion to Christ. <span class="verse">11:4</span> For if someone comes and proclaims<sup><a id="n470118" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n470118">8</a></sup> another Jesus different from the one we proclaimed,<sup><a id="n470119" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n470119">9</a></sup> or if you receive a different spirit than the one you received,<sup><a id="n4701110" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701110">10</a></sup> or a different gospel than the one you accepted,<sup><a id="n4701111" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701111">11</a></sup> you put up with it well enough!<sup><a id="n4701112" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701112">12</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:5</span> For I consider myself not at all inferior to those “super-apostles.”<sup><a id="n4701113" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701113">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:6</span> And even if I am unskilled<sup><a id="n4701114" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701114">14</a></sup> in speaking, yet I am certainly not so in knowledge. Indeed, we have made this plain to you in everything in every way. <span class="verse">11:7</span> Or did I commit a sin by humbling myself<sup><a id="n4701115" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701115">15</a></sup> so that you could be exalted, because I proclaimed<sup><a id="n4701116" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701116">16</a></sup> the gospel of God to you free of charge? <span class="verse">11:8</span> I robbed other churches by receiving support from them so that I could serve you!<sup><a id="n4701117" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701117">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:9</span> When<sup><a id="n4701118" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701118">18</a></sup> I was with you and was in need, I was not a burden to anyone, for the brothers who came from Macedonia fully supplied my needs.<sup><a id="n4701119" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701119">19</a></sup> I<sup><a id="n4701120" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701120">20</a></sup> kept myself from being a burden to you in any way, and will continue to do so. <span class="verse">11:10</span> As the truth of Christ is in me, this boasting of mine<sup><a id="n4701121" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701121">21</a></sup> will not be stopped<sup><a id="n4701122" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701122">22</a></sup> in the regions of Achaia. <span class="verse">11:11</span> Why? Because I do not love you? God knows I do!<sup><a id="n4701123" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701123">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:12</span> And what I am doing I will continue to do, so that I may eliminate any opportunity for those who want a chance to be regarded as our equals<sup><a id="n4701124" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701124">24</a></sup> in the things they boast about. <span class="verse">11:13</span> For such people are false apostles, deceitful<sup><a id="n4701125" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701125">25</a></sup> workers, disguising themselves<sup><a id="n4701126" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701126">26</a></sup> as apostles of Christ. <span class="verse">11:14</span> And no wonder, for even Satan disguises himself<sup><a id="n4701127" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701127">27</a></sup> as an angel of light. <span class="verse">11:15</span> Therefore it is not surprising his servants also disguise themselves<sup><a id="n4701128" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701128">28</a></sup> as servants of righteousness, whose end will correspond to their actions.<sup><a id="n4701129" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701129">29</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Sufferings for Christ</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:16</span> I say again, let no one think that I am a fool.<sup><a id="n4701130" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701130">30</a></sup> But if you do, then at least accept me as a fool, so that I too may boast a little. <span class="verse">11:17</span> What I am saying with this boastful confidence<sup><a id="n4701131" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701131">31</a></sup> I do not say the way the Lord would.<sup><a id="n4701132" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701132">32</a></sup> Instead it is, as it were, foolishness. <span class="verse">11:18</span> Since many<sup><a id="n4701133" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701133">33</a></sup> are boasting according to human standards,<sup><a id="n4701134" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701134">34</a></sup> I too will boast. <span class="verse">11:19</span> For since you are so wise, you put up with<sup><a id="n4701135" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701135">35</a></sup> fools gladly. <span class="verse">11:20</span> For you put up with<sup><a id="n4701136" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701136">36</a></sup> it if someone makes slaves of you, if someone exploits you, if someone takes advantage of you, if someone behaves arrogantly<sup><a id="n4701137" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701137">37</a></sup> toward you, if someone strikes you in the face. <span class="verse">11:21</span> (To my disgrace<sup><a id="n4701138" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701138">38</a></sup> I must say that we were too weak for that!)<sup><a id="n4701139" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701139">39</a></sup> But whatever anyone else dares to boast about<sup><a id="n4701140" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701140">40</a></sup> (I am speaking foolishly), I also dare to boast about the same thing.<sup><a id="n4701141" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701141">41</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:22</span> Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I. <span class="verse">11:23</span> Are they servants of Christ? (I am talking like I am out of my mind!) I am even more so: with much greater labors, with far more imprisonments, with more severe beatings, facing death many times. <span class="verse">11:24</span> Five times I received from the Jews forty lashes less one.<sup><a id="n4701142" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701142">42</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:25</span> Three times I was beaten with a rod.<sup><a id="n4701143" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701143">43</a></sup> Once I received a stoning.<sup><a id="n4701144" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701144">44</a></sup> Three times I suffered shipwreck. A night and a day I spent adrift in the open sea. <span class="verse">11:26</span> I have been on journeys many times, in dangers from rivers, in dangers from robbers,<sup><a id="n4701145" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701145">45</a></sup> in dangers from my own countrymen, in dangers from Gentiles, in dangers in the city, in dangers in the wilderness,<sup><a id="n4701146" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701146">46</a></sup> in dangers at sea, in dangers from false brothers, <span class="verse">11:27</span> in hard work and toil,<sup><a id="n4701147" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701147">47</a></sup> through many sleepless nights, in hunger and thirst, many times without food, in cold and without enough clothing.<sup><a id="n4701148" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701148">48</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:28</span> Apart from other things,<sup><a id="n4701149" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701149">49</a></sup> there is the daily pressure on me of my anxious concern<sup><a id="n4701150" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701150">50</a></sup> for all the churches. <span class="verse">11:29</span> Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is led into sin,<sup><a id="n4701151" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701151">51</a></sup> and I do not burn with indignation? <span class="verse">11:30</span> If I must boast,<sup><a id="n4701152" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701152">52</a></sup> I will boast about the things that show my weakness.<sup><a id="n4701153" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701153">53</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:31</span> The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, who is blessed forever, knows I am not lying. <span class="verse">11:32</span> In Damascus, the governor<sup><a id="n4701154" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701154">54</a></sup> under King Aretas was guarding the city of Damascus<sup><a id="n4701155" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701155">55</a></sup> in order to arrest<sup><a id="n4701156" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701156">56</a></sup> me, <span class="verse">11:33</span> but I was let down in a rope-basket<sup><a id="n4701157" href="file1136_notes.xhtml#n4701157">57</a></sup> through a window in the city wall, and escaped his hands. </p>

</body>
</html>