<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Colossians 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Colossians<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortations to Seek the Things Above</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> Therefore, if you have been raised with Christ, keep seeking the things above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God. <span class="verse">3:2</span> Keep thinking about things above, not things on the earth, <span class="verse">3:3</span> for you have died and your life is hidden with Christ in God. <span class="verse">3:4</span> When Christ (who is your<sup><a id="n510031" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n510031">1</a></sup> life) appears, then you too will be revealed in glory with him. <span class="verse">3:5</span> So put to death whatever in your nature belongs to the earth:<sup><a id="n510032" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n510032">2</a></sup> sexual immorality, impurity, shameful passion,<sup><a id="n510033" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n510033">3</a></sup> evil desire, and greed which is idolatry. <span class="verse">3:6</span> Because of these things the wrath of God is coming on the sons of disobedience.<sup><a id="n510034" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n510034">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:7</span> You also lived your lives<sup><a id="n510035" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n510035">5</a></sup> in this way at one time, when you used to live among them. <span class="verse">3:8</span> But now, put off all such things<sup><a id="n510036" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n510036">6</a></sup> as anger, rage, malice, slander, abusive language from your mouth. <span class="verse">3:9</span> Do not lie to one another since you have put off the old man with its practices <span class="verse">3:10</span> and have been clothed with the new man<sup><a id="n510037" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n510037">7</a></sup> that is being renewed in knowledge according to the image of the one who created it. <span class="verse">3:11</span> Here there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave<sup><a id="n510038" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n510038">8</a></sup> or free, but Christ is all and in all. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Unity and Love</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:12</span> Therefore, as the elect of God, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourselves with a heart of mercy,<sup><a id="n510039" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n510039">9</a></sup> kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience, <span class="verse">3:13</span> bearing with one another and forgiving<sup><a id="n5100310" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n5100310">10</a></sup> one another, if someone happens to have<sup><a id="n5100311" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n5100311">11</a></sup> a complaint against anyone else. Just as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also forgive others.<sup><a id="n5100312" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n5100312">12</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:14</span> And to all these<sup><a id="n5100313" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n5100313">13</a></sup> virtues<sup><a id="n5100314" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n5100314">14</a></sup> add<sup><a id="n5100315" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n5100315">15</a></sup> love, which is the perfect bond.<sup><a id="n5100316" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n5100316">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:15</span> Let the peace of Christ be in control in your heart (for you were in fact called as one body<sup><a id="n5100317" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n5100317">17</a></sup> to this peace), and be thankful. <span class="verse">3:16</span> Let the word of Christ<sup><a id="n5100318" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n5100318">18</a></sup> dwell in you richly, teaching and exhorting one another with all wisdom, singing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, all with grace<sup><a id="n5100319" href="file1161_notes.xhtml#n5100319">19</a></sup> in your hearts to God. <span class="verse">3:17</span> And whatever you do in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him. </p>

</body>
</html>