<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 26</h2>
<p id="n400261"><a href="file995.xhtml#n400261">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened when.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">καὶ ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">kai egeneto</span>, “it happened that”) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400262"><a href="file995.xhtml#n400262">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will be delivered up.”</p></p>
<p id="n400263"><a href="file995.xhtml#n400263">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>crucified</i> in 20:19.</p></p>
<p id="n400264"><a href="file995.xhtml#n400264">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400265"><a href="file995.xhtml#n400265">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The suggestion here is that Jesus was too popular to openly arrest him.</p></p>
<p id="n400266"><a href="file995.xhtml#n400266">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>leper</i> in Matt 8:2.</p></p>
<p id="n400267"><a href="file995.xhtml#n400267">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>jar</i> made of <i>alabaster</i> stone was normally used for very precious substances like perfumes. It normally had a long neck which was sealed and had to be broken off so the contents could be used.</p></p>
<p id="n400268"><a href="file995.xhtml#n400268">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <span class="greek">Μύρον</span> (<span class="translit">muron</span>) was usually made of myrrh (from which the English word is derived) but here it is used in the sense of ointment or perfumed oil (L&amp;N 6.205).</p><p><b>sn</b> Mark specifies that the <i>perfumed oil</i> was Nard or spikenard, which is a fragrant oil from the root and spike of the nard plant of northern India (Mark 14:3). This <i>perfumed oil</i>, if made of something like nard, would have been extremely <i>expensive</i>, costing up to a year’s pay for an average laborer.</p></p>
<p id="n400269"><a href="file995.xhtml#n400269">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as he was reclining.”</p><p><b>sn</b> 1st century middle eastern meals were not eaten while sitting at a table, but while reclining on one’s side on the floor with the head closest to the low table and the feet farthest away.</p></p>
<p id="n4002610"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002611"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002612"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the money” are not in the Greek text, but are implied (as the proceeds from the sale of the perfumed oil).</p></p>
<p id="n4002613"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002614"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For she.” Here <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002615"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> In the Greek text of this clause, “me” is in emphatic position (the first word in the clause). To convey some impression of the emphasis, an exclamation point is used in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4002616"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For when.” Here <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002617"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002618"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “What will you give to me, and I will deliver him over to you?”</p></p>
<p id="n4002619"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002620"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Judas) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4002621"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the feast of” are not in the Greek text, but have been supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4002622"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002622">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the disciples came to Jesus, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb to make the sequence of events clear in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4002623"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002623">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> This required getting a suitable lamb and finding lodging in Jerusalem where the meal could be eaten. The population of the city swelled during the feast, so lodging could be difficult to find. The <i>Passover</i> was celebrated each year in commemoration of the Israelites’ deliverance from Egypt; thus it was a feast celebrating redemption (see Exod 12). The Passover lamb was roasted and eaten after sunset in a family group of at least ten people (<i>m. Pesahim</i> 7.13). People ate the meal while reclining (see the note on <i>table</i> in 26:20). It included, besides the lamb, unleavened bread and bitter herbs as a reminder of Israel’s bitter affliction at the hands of the Egyptians. Four cups of wine mixed with water were also used for the meal. For a further description of the meal and the significance of the wine cups, see E. Ferguson, <i>Backgrounds of Early Christianity,</i> 523-24.</p></p>
<p id="n4002624"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002625"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002625">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4002626"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002626">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002627"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he was reclining at table,” as 1st century middle eastern meals were not eaten while sitting at a table, but while reclining on one’s side on the floor with the head closest to the low table and the feet farthest away.</p></p>
<p id="n4002628"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002628">28</a> <p><b>tc</b> Many witnesses, some of them quite significant, have <span class="greek">μαθητῶν</span> (<span class="translit">mathētōn</span>, “disciples”; <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A L W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> 33 892 1241 1424 <i>pm</i> lat) or <span class="greek">μαθητῶν αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">mathētōn autou</span>, “his disciples”; 0281 it) after <span class="greek">δώδεκα</span> (<span class="translit">dōdeka</span>, “twelve”). However, such clarifications are typical scribal expansions to the text. Further, the shorter reading (the one that ends with <span class="greek">δώδεκα</span>) has strong support in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>37vid,45vid</sup> B D K <span class="greek">Γ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 565 579 700 <i>pm</i>. Thus both internally and externally the reading that ends the verse with “the twelve” is to be preferred. </p></p>
<p id="n4002629"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002629">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002630"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will hand me over.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002631"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002631">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002632"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">λυπούμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">lupoumenoi</span>) has been translated as a finite verb to make the sequence of events clear in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4002633"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002633">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, he said.” This is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002634"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002634">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The one who has dipped his hand into the bowl with me</i>. The point of Jesus’ comment here is not to identify the specific individual per se, but to indicate that it is one who was close to him—somebody whom no one would suspect. His comment serves to heighten the treachery of Judas’ betrayal.</p></p>
<p id="n4002635"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002635">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, Judas.” This is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to reflect the sequence of events in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4002636"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002636">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4002637"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002637">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002638"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002638">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for this is my blood of the covenant that is poured out for many.” In order to avoid confusion about which is poured out, the translation supplies “blood” twice so that the following phrase clearly modifies “blood,” not “covenant.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002639"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002639">39</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including several significant ones, read <span class="greek">καινῆς</span> (<span class="translit">kainēs</span>, “new”) here. Homoioteleuton is a possible reason for the omission, since the article, adjective, and noun are all first declension genitive singulars (<span class="greek">τῆς καινῆς διαθήκης</span>, <span class="translit">tēs kainēs diathēkēs</span>, “the new covenant”), but the likelihood of excellent, early, and sufficiently diverse witnesses all making the same mistake is remote. A much more probable scenario is that the addition of <span class="greek">καινῆς</span> was motivated by the parallel in Luke 22:20. It is a natural expansion on the text. Coupled with the fact that the shorter reading is found in such good and diverse witnesses (e.g., <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>37,45vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L Z <span class="greek">Θ</span> 0298<sup>vid</sup> 33 mae), it most likely is the initial text.</p><p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ death established the forgiveness promised in the new <i>covenant</i> of Jer 31:31. Jesus is reinterpreting the symbolism of the Passover meal, indicating the presence of a new era.</p></p>
<p id="n4002640"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002640">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002641"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002641">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “produce” (“the produce of the vine” is a figurative expression for wine).</p></p>
<p id="n4002642"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002642">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002643"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002643">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>After singing a hymn</i>. The <i>Hallel</i> Psalms (Pss 113-118) were sung during the meal. Psalms 113 and 114 were sung just before the second cup and 115-118 were sung at the end of the meal, after the fourth, or <i>hallel</i> cup.</p></p>
<p id="n4002644"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002644">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Zech 13:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4002645"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002645">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, Peter said to him.” This is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002646"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002646">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002647"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002647">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ground, praying and saying.” Here the participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002648"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002648">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if it is possible.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002649"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002649">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>This cup</i> alludes to the wrath of God that Jesus would experience (in the form of suffering and death) for us. See Pss 11:6; 75:8-9; Isa 51:17, 19, 22 for this figure.</p></p>
<p id="n4002650"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002650">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002651"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002651">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant here in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002652"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002652">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this”; the referent (the cup) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4002653"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002653">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because their eyes were weighed down,” an idiom for becoming extremely or excessively sleepy (L&amp;N 23.69).</p></p>
<p id="n4002654"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002654">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one who betrays me.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002655"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002655">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold, Judas.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4002656"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002656">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one who betrays him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002657"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002657">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The one I kiss is he.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002658"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002658">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> This remark is parenthetical within the narrative and has thus been placed in parentheses.</p></p>
<p id="n4002659"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002659">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002660"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002660">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> Judas’ act of betrayal when he <i>kissed</i> Jesus is especially sinister when it is realized that it was common in the culture of the times for a disciple to kiss his master when greeting him.</p></p>
<p id="n4002661"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002661">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002662"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002662">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and put their hands on Jesus.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002663"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002663">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold one.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4002664"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002664">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “extending his hand, drew out his sword, and struck.” Because rapid motion is implied in the circumstances, the translation “grabbed” was used.</p></p>
<p id="n4002665"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002665">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 8:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4002666"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002666">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “put your sword back in its place” for this phrase is given in L&amp;N 85.52.</p></p>
<p id="n4002667"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002667">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> A legion was a Roman army unit of about 6,000 soldiers, so <i>twelve legions</i> would be 72,000.</p></p>
<p id="n4002668"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002668">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a revolutionary.” This term can refer to one who stirs up rebellion: BDAG 594 s.v. <span class="greek">λῃστής</span> 2 has “<i>revolutionary, insurrectionist</i>, <i>guerrilla</i>” citing evidence from Josephus (<i>J. W</i>. 2.13.2-3 [2.253-254]). However, this usage generally postdates Jesus’ time. It does refer to a figure of violence. Luke uses the same term for the highwaymen who attack the traveler in the parable of the good Samaritan (Luke 10:30).</p></p>
<p id="n4002669"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002669">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and” (<span class="greek">καί</span>, <span class="translit">kai</span>), a conjunction that is elastic enough to be used to indicate a contrast, as here.</p></p>
<p id="n4002670"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002670">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “where.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002671"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002671">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “where the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4002672"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002672">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002673"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002673">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The guards</i> would have been the guards of the chief priests who had accompanied Judas to arrest Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4002674"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002674">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now the.” Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002675"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002675">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002676"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002676">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “This one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002677"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002677">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the false testimony.</p></p>
<p id="n4002678"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002678">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002679"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002679">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4002680"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002680">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 110:1. This is a claim that Jesus shares authority with God in heaven. Those present may have thought they were his judges, but, in fact, the reverse was true.</p></p>
<p id="n4002681"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002681">81</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>the Power</i> is a circumlocution for referring to God. Such indirect references to God were common in 1st century Judaism out of reverence for the divine name.</p></p>
<p id="n4002682"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002682">82</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Dan 7:13 (see also Matt 24:30).</p></p>
<p id="n4002683"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002683">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the high priest tore his clothes, saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002684"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002684">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold now.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4002685"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002685">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “What do you think?”</p></p>
<p id="n4002686"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002686">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, they said.” This is somewhat redundant and has been simplified in the translation. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002687"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002687">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he is guilty of death.” L&amp;N 88.313 states, “pertaining to being guilty and thus deserving some particular penalty—‘guilty and deserving, guilty and punishable by.’ <span class="greek">οἱ δὲ ἀποκριθέντες εἶπαν</span>, <span class="greek">᾿Ενοχος θανάτου ἐστίν</span> ‘they answered, He is guilty and deserves death’ Mt 26:66.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002688"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002688">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4002689"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002689">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Who is the one who hit you?”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Who hit you?</i> This is a variation of one of three ancient games that involved blindfolds.</p></p>
<p id="n4002690"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002690">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002691"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002691">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here is <span class="greek">παιδίσκη</span> (<span class="translit">paidiskē</span>), referring to a slave girl or slave woman.</p></p>
<p id="n4002692"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002692">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he denied it…saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002693"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002693">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002694"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002694">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “slave girl” are not in the Greek text, but are implied by the feminine singular form <span class="greek">ἄλλη</span> (<span class="translit">allē</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4002695"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002695">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4002696"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002696">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “your speech.”</p></p>
<p id="n4002697"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002697">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> It seems most likely that this refers to a real rooster crowing, although a number of scholars have suggested that “cockcrow” is a technical term referring to the trumpet call which ended the third watch of the night (from midnight to 3 a.m.). This would then be a reference to the Roman <i>gallicinium</i> (<span class="greek">ἀλεκτοροφωνία</span>, <span class="translit">alektorophōnia</span>; the term is used in Mark 13:35 and is found in some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> [<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>37vid,45</sup> ƒ<sup>1</sup>] in Matt 26:34) which would have been sounded at 3 a.m.; in this case Jesus would have prophesied a precise time by which the denials would have taken place. For more details see J. H. Bernard, <i>St. John</i> (ICC), 2:604. However, in light of the fact that Mark mentions the rooster crowing twice (Mark 14:72) and in Luke 22:60 the words are reversed (<span class="greek">ἐφώνησεν ἀλέκτωρ</span>, <span class="translit">ephōnēsen alektōr</span>), it is more probable that a real rooster is in view. In any event natural cockcrow would have occurred at approximately 3 a.m. in Palestine at this time of year (March-April) anyway.</p></p>
<p id="n4002698"><a href="file995.xhtml#n4002698">98</a> <p><b>sn</b> When Peter <i>went out and wept bitterly</i> it shows he really did not want to fail here and was deeply grieved that he had.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
