<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Condemnation of the Moralist</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> <sup><a id="n450021" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n450021">1</a></sup> Therefore<sup><a id="n450022" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n450022">2</a></sup> you are without excuse,<sup><a id="n450023" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n450023">3</a></sup> whoever you are,<sup><a id="n450024" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n450024">4</a></sup> when you judge someone else.<sup><a id="n450025" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n450025">5</a></sup> For on whatever grounds<sup><a id="n450026" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n450026">6</a></sup> you judge another, you condemn yourself, because you who judge practice the same things. <span class="verse">2:2</span> Now we know that God’s judgment is in accordance with truth<sup><a id="n450027" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n450027">7</a></sup> against those who practice such things. <span class="verse">2:3</span> And do you think,<sup><a id="n450028" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n450028">8</a></sup> whoever you are, when you judge<sup><a id="n450029" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n450029">9</a></sup> those who practice such things and yet do them yourself,<sup><a id="n4500210" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500210">10</a></sup> that you will escape God’s judgment? <span class="verse">2:4</span> Or do you have contempt for the wealth of his kindness, forbearance, and patience, and yet do not know<sup><a id="n4500211" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500211">11</a></sup> that God’s kindness leads you to repentance? <span class="verse">2:5</span> But because of your stubbornness<sup><a id="n4500212" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500212">12</a></sup> and your unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath for yourselves in the day of wrath, when God’s righteous judgment is revealed!<sup><a id="n4500213" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500213">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:6</span> He<sup><a id="n4500214" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500214">14</a></sup> <b><i>will reward</i></b><sup><a id="n4500215" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500215">15</a></sup> <b><i>each one according to his works</i></b>:<sup><a id="n4500216" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500216">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:7</span> eternal life to those who by perseverance in good works seek glory and honor and immortality, <span class="verse">2:8</span> but<sup><a id="n4500217" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500217">17</a></sup> wrath and anger to those who live in selfish ambition<sup><a id="n4500218" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500218">18</a></sup> and do not obey the truth but follow<sup><a id="n4500219" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500219">19</a></sup> unrighteousness. <span class="verse">2:9</span> There will be<sup><a id="n4500220" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500220">20</a></sup> affliction and distress on everyone<sup><a id="n4500221" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500221">21</a></sup> who does evil, on the Jew first and also the Greek,<sup><a id="n4500222" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500222">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:10</span> but<sup><a id="n4500223" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500223">23</a></sup> glory and honor and peace for everyone who does good, for the Jew first and also the Greek. <span class="verse">2:11</span> For there is no partiality with God. <span class="verse">2:12</span> For all who have sinned apart from the law<sup><a id="n4500224" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500224">24</a></sup> will also perish apart from the law, and all who have sinned under the law will be judged by the law. <span class="verse">2:13</span> For it is not those who hear the law who are righteous before God, but those who do the law will be declared righteous.<sup><a id="n4500225" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500225">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:14</span> For whenever the Gentiles,<sup><a id="n4500226" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500226">26</a></sup> who do not have the law, do by nature<sup><a id="n4500227" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500227">27</a></sup> the things required by the law,<sup><a id="n4500228" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500228">28</a></sup> these who do not have the law are a law to themselves. <span class="verse">2:15</span> They<sup><a id="n4500229" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500229">29</a></sup> show that the work of the law is written<sup><a id="n4500230" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500230">30</a></sup> in their hearts, as their conscience bears witness and their conflicting thoughts accuse or else defend<sup><a id="n4500231" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500231">31</a></sup> them,<sup><a id="n4500232" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500232">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:16</span> on the day when God will judge<sup><a id="n4500233" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500233">33</a></sup> the secrets of human hearts,<sup><a id="n4500234" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500234">34</a></sup> according to my gospel<sup><a id="n4500235" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500235">35</a></sup> through Christ Jesus. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Condemnation of the Jew</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:17</span> But if you call yourself a Jew and rely on the law<sup><a id="n4500236" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500236">36</a></sup> and boast of your relationship to God<sup><a id="n4500237" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500237">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:18</span> and know his will<sup><a id="n4500238" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500238">38</a></sup> and approve the superior things because you receive instruction from the law,<sup><a id="n4500239" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500239">39</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:19</span> and if you are convinced<sup><a id="n4500240" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500240">40</a></sup> that you yourself are a guide to the blind, a light to those who are in darkness, <span class="verse">2:20</span> an educator of the senseless, a teacher of little children, because you have in the law the essential features of knowledge and of the truth— <span class="verse">2:21</span> therefore<sup><a id="n4500241" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500241">41</a></sup> you who teach someone else, do you not teach yourself? You who preach against stealing, do you steal? <span class="verse">2:22</span> You who tell others not to commit adultery, do you commit adultery? You who abhor<sup><a id="n4500242" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500242">42</a></sup> idols, do you rob temples? <span class="verse">2:23</span> You who boast in the law dishonor God by transgressing the law! <span class="verse">2:24</span> For just as it is written, “<b><i>the name of God is being blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4500243" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500243">43</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:25</span> For circumcision<sup><a id="n4500244" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500244">44</a></sup> has its value if you practice the law, but<sup><a id="n4500245" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500245">45</a></sup> if you break the law,<sup><a id="n4500246" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500246">46</a></sup> your circumcision has become uncircumcision. <span class="verse">2:26</span> Therefore if the uncircumcised man obeys<sup><a id="n4500247" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500247">47</a></sup> the righteous requirements of the law, will not his uncircumcision be regarded as circumcision? <span class="verse">2:27</span> And the physically uncircumcised man,<sup><a id="n4500248" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500248">48</a></sup> by keeping the law, will judge you to be the transgressor of the law, even though<sup><a id="n4500249" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500249">49</a></sup> you have the letter<sup><a id="n4500250" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500250">50</a></sup> and circumcision! <span class="verse">2:28</span> For a person is not a Jew who is one outwardly, nor is circumcision something that is outward in the flesh, <span class="verse">2:29</span> but someone is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is of the heart<sup><a id="n4500251" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500251">51</a></sup> by the Spirit<sup><a id="n4500252" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500252">52</a></sup> and not by the letter.<sup><a id="n4500253" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500253">53</a></sup> This person’s<sup><a id="n4500254" href="file1093_notes.xhtml#n4500254">54</a></sup> praise is not from people but from God. </p>

</body>
</html>