<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Thessalonians 5</h2>
<p id="n520051"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n520051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “concerning the times and the seasons,” a reference to future periods of eschatological fulfillment (cf. Acts 1:7). </p></p>
<p id="n520052"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n520052">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n520053"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n520053">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>day of the Lord</i> is the period of time in the future when the Lord will intervene in the events of this earth to consummate his redemption and his judgment (Isa 2:11-12; 13:6-13; Ezek 30:3; Joel 1:15; 2:32; 3:18; Amos 5:18-20; Obad 15-17; Zeph 1:7-18; 2:2-3; Zech 14:1, 13, 20-21; Mal 4:1, 5; 1 Cor 1:8; 5:5; 2 Cor 1:14; 2 Thess 2:2; 2 Pet 3:10). It includes both blessings and curses, though the latter is emphasized here.</p></p>
<p id="n520054"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n520054">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus used a <i>thief</i> coming at <i>night</i> as an illustration of the unexpected and hostile nature of the coming of God’s judgment in the future. This is repeated in various ways in v. 4; 2 Pet 3:10; Rev 3:3; 16:15.</p></p>
<p id="n520055"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n520055">5</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>, “now”) is found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> B D 0226 6 1505 1739 1881 2464 <i>al</i>, but lacking in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A F G 33 it. <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>, “for”) is the reading of the Byzantine text and a few other witnesses (<span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 1175 1241 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i>). Although normally the shorter reading is to be preferred, the external evidence is superior for <span class="greek">δέ</span> (being found in the somewhat better Alexandrian and Western witnesses). What, then, is to explain the <span class="greek">γάρ</span>? Scribes were prone to replace <span class="greek">δέ</span> with <span class="greek">γάρ</span>, especially in sentences suggesting a causal or explanatory idea, thus making the point more explicit. Internally, the omission of <span class="greek">δέ</span> looks unintentional, a case of homoioarcton (<span class="uncial">otandelegwsin</span>). Although a decision is difficult, in this instance <span class="greek">δέ</span> has the best credentials for authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n520056"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n520056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “peace and security,” with “there is” understood in the Greek construction.</p></p>
<p id="n520057"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n520057">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> a singular “birth pain.”</p></p>
<p id="n520058"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n520058">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n520059"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n520059">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 59:17.</p></p>
<p id="n5200510"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hope of salvation” (“a helmet…for salvation” is an allusion to Isa 59:17).</p></p>
<p id="n5200511"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200511">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>God did not destine us for wrath</i>. In context this refers to the outpouring of God’s <i>wrath</i> on the earth in the day of the Lord (1 Thess 5:2-4).</p></p>
<p id="n5200512"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one who died,” describing Jesus Christ (1 Thess 5:9). Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started at the beginning of v. 10 in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5200513"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200513">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrases <i>alert or asleep</i> may be understood (1) of moral alertness (living in faith, love, and hope as vv. 6, 8 call for, versus being unresponsive to God) or (2) of physical life and death (whether alive or dead). The first fits better with the context of 5:1-9, while the second returns to the point Paul started with in 4:13-18 (no disadvantage for the believing dead).</p></p>
<p id="n5200514"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5200515"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5200516"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who will also do,” with the object understood from v. 23.</p></p>
<p id="n5200517"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5200518"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5200519"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I adjure you by the Lord,” “I put you under oath before the Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200520"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200520">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including some significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1241 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> ar vg sy bo), read “holy” before “brothers [and sisters]” (<span class="greek">ἁγίοις ἀδελφοῖς</span>, <span class="translit">hagiois adelphois</span>). It is possible that <span class="greek">ἁγίοις</span> dropped out by way of homoioteleuton (in majuscule script the words would be written <span class="uncial">agioisadelfois</span>), but it is equally possible that the adjective was added because of the influence of <span class="greek">ἁγίῳ</span> (<span class="translit">hagiō</span>) in v. 26. Another internal consideration is that the expression <span class="greek">ἅγιοι ἀδελφοί</span> (<span class="translit">hagioi adelphoi</span>, “holy brothers”) is not found elsewhere in the <i>corpus Paulinum</i>, though Col 1:2 comes close. But this fact could be argued either way: It may suggest that such an expression is not Pauline; on the other hand, the unusualness of the expression could have resulted in an alteration by some scribes. At the same time, since 1 Thessalonians is one of the earliest of Paul’s letters, and written well before he addresses Christians as <i>saints</i> (<span class="greek">ἅγιοι</span>) in 1 Corinthians for the first time, one might argue that Paul’s own forms of expression were going through something of a metamorphosis. Scribes insensitive to this fact could well impute later Pauline collocations onto his earlier letters. The internal evidence seems to support, albeit slightly, the omission of <span class="greek">ἁγίοις</span> here. Externally, most of the better witnesses of the Alexandrian and Western families (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B D F G 0278 it sa Ambst) offer sufficient diversity for the shorter reading. Although the rating of “A” in UBS<sup>4</sup> and UBS<sup>5</sup> for the omission seems too generous, this reading is still to be preferred.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5200521"><a href="file1168.xhtml#n5200521">21</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, including a few significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 1505 1739<sup>c</sup> 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy bo), conclude this letter with<span class="greek"> ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”). Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Further, the witnesses for the omission are sufficiently early and diffuse (B D* F G 0278 6 33 1739* 1881 it sa Ambst) to render the verdict against the particle here. </p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
