<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 20</h2>
<p id="n440201"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n440201">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “exhorting.”</p></p>
<p id="n440202"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n440202">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and taking leave of them.”</p></p>
<p id="n440203"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n440203">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Macedonia</i> was the Roman province of Macedonia in Greece.</p></p>
<p id="n440204"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n440204">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 633 s.v. <span class="greek">μέρος</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">γ</span> gives the meanings “<i>the parts</i> (of a geographical area), <i>region, district</i>,” but the use of “district” in this context probably implies too much specificity.</p></p>
<p id="n440205"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n440205">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and encouraging them with many words.” The participle <span class="greek">παρακαλέσας</span> (<span class="translit">parakalesas</span>, “encouraging”) has been translated by the phrase “spoken…words of encouragement” because the formal equivalent is awkward in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n440206"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n440206">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “[to] them”; the referent (the believers there) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n440207"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n440207">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> In popular usage the term translated “Greece” here could also refer to the Roman province officially known as Achaia (BDAG 318 s.v. <span class="greek">῾Ελλάς</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n440208"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n440208">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 841 s.v. <span class="greek">ποιέω</span> 5.c, “w. an acc. of time <i>spend, stay</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n440209"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n440209">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">γενομένης</span> (<span class="translit">genomenēs</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle. L&amp;N 30.71 has “<span class="greek">ἐπιβουλῆς αὐτῷ ὑπὸ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων</span> ‘because the Jews had made a plot against him’ Ac 20:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402010"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402010">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>plot</i> is one of several noted by Luke (Acts 9:24; 20:19; 23:30).</p></p>
<p id="n4402011"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402011">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 628 s.v. <span class="greek">μέλλω</span> 1.c.<span class="greek">γ</span> has “denoting an intended action: <i>intend, propose, have in mind</i>…Ac 17:31; 20:3, 7, 13ab; 23:15; 26:2; 27:30.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402012"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402012">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4 gives “<i>put out to sea</i>” here (as a nautical technical term). However, since the English expression “put out to sea” could be understood to mean Paul was already aboard the ship (which is not clear from the context), the simpler expression “sail” is used at this point in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402013"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402013">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 199 s.v. <span class="greek">γίνομαι</span> 7 has “<span class="greek">ἐγένετο γνώμης</span> <i>he decided</i> Ac 20:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402014"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402014">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Macedonia</i> was the Roman province of Macedonia in Greece.</p></p>
<p id="n4402015"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402015">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402016"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402016">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Berea</i> (alternate spelling in NRSV <i>Beroea</i>; Greek <span class="translit">Beroia</span>) was a very old city in Macedonia on the river Astraeus about 45 mi (75 km) from Thessalonica.</p></p>
<p id="n4402017"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402017">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of the Thessalonians.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402018"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402018">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and Gaius,” but this <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4402019"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402019">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Derbe</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 35 mi (60 km) southeast of Lystra.</p></p>
<p id="n4402020"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402020">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Asians Tychicus and Trophimus.” In the NT “Asia” always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n4402021"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402021">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “These, having gone on ahead, were waiting.” The participle <span class="greek">προελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">proelthontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402022"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402022">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> This marks the beginning of one of the “<i>we</i>” sections in Acts (16:10-17; 20:5-15; 21:1-18; 27:1-28:16). These have been traditionally understood to mean that the author was in the company of Paul for this part of the journey.</p></p>
<p id="n4402023"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402023">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Troas</i> was a port city (and surrounding region) on the northwest coast of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4402024"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402024">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> This marks the beginning of another “<i>we</i>” section in Acts. These have been traditionally understood to mean that Luke was in the company of Paul for this part of the journey.</p></p>
<p id="n4402026"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402026">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>days of Unleavened Bread</i> refer to the week following Passover. It was celebrated for seven days beginning on the fifteenth day of the month Nisan (March-April) after the Passover (Exod 12:1-20; Ezek 45:21-24; Matt 26:17; Luke 22:1).</p></p>
<p id="n4402027"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402027">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 160 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄχρι</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">α</span> has “<span class="greek">ἄ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἡμερῶν πέντε</span> <i>within five days</i> Ac 20:6.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402028"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402028">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to them”; the referent (the others mentioned in v. 4) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402029"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402029">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Troas</i> was a port city (and surrounding region) on the northwest coast of Asia Minor. From Philippi to Troas was about 125 mi (200 km).</p></p>
<p id="n4402030"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402030">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>On the first day</i>. This is the first mention of a Sunday gathering (1 Cor 16:2).</p></p>
<p id="n4402031"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402031">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “assembled.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402032"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402032">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">διαλέγομαι</span> (<span class="translit">dialegomai</span>) is frequently used of Paul addressing Jews in the synagogue. As G. Schrenk (<i>TDNT</i> 2:94-95) points out, “What is at issue is the address which any qualified member of a synagogue might give.” Other examples of this may be found in the NT in Matt 4:23 and Mark 1:21. In the context of a Christian gathering, it is preferable to translate <span class="greek">διελέγετο</span> (<span class="translit">dielegeto</span>) simply as “speak” here. The imperfect verb <span class="greek">διελέγετο</span> has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4402033"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402033">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 628 s.v. <span class="greek">μέλλω</span> 1.c.<span class="greek">γ</span> has “denoting an intended action: <i>intend, propose, have in mind</i>…Ac 17:31; 20:3, 7, 13ab; 23:15; 26:2; 27:30.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402034"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402034">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “prolonged.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402035"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402035">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> More commonly <span class="greek">λαμπάς</span> (<span class="translit">lampas</span>) means “torch,” but here according to BDAG 585 s.v. <span class="greek">λαμπάς</span> 2, “<i>lamp</i>…w. a wick and space for oil.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402036"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402036">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is best taken as a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4402037"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402037">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> This window was probably a simple opening in the wall (see also BDAG 462 s.v. <span class="greek">θυρίς</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402038"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402038">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sinking into a deep sleep.” BDAG 529 s.v. <span class="greek">καταφέρω</span> 3 has “<span class="greek">ὕπνῳ βαθεῖ</span> <i>sink into a deep sleep</i>…Ac 20:9a.” The participle <span class="greek">καταφερόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">katapheromenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402039"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402039">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">διαλεγομένου</span> (<span class="translit">dialegomenou</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402040"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402040">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 529 s.v. <span class="greek">καταφέρω</span> 3 has “<span class="greek">κατενεχθεὶς ἀπὸ τοῦ ὔπνου</span> <i>overwhelmed by sleep</i> vs. 9b, ” but this expression is less common in contemporary English than phrases like “fast asleep” or “sound asleep.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402041"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402041">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going down.” The participle <span class="greek">καταβάς</span> (<span class="translit">katabas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402042"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402042">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 377 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιπίπτω</span> 1.b has “<span class="greek">ἐπέπεσεν αὐτῷ</span> <i>he threw himself upon him</i> Ac 20:10.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402043"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402043">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on him”; the referent (the young man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402044"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402044">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 959 s.v. <span class="greek">συμπεριλαμβάνω</span> has “to throw one’s arms around, <i>embrace</i> w. acc. to be supplied Ac 20:10.” However, “embraced the young man” might be taken (out of context) to have erotic implications, while “threw his arms around him” would be somewhat redundant since “threw” has been used in the previous phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n4402045"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402045">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for his life is in him” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4402046"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402046">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402047"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402047">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going back upstairs.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναβάς</span> (<span class="translit">anabas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402048"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402048">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “talking with them.” The participle <span class="greek">ὁμιλήσας</span> (<span class="translit">homilēsas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402049"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402049">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “were not to a moderate degree” (an idiom). L&amp;N 78.11 states: “<span class="greek">μετρίως</span>: a moderate degree of some activity or state—‘moderately, to a moderate extent.’ <span class="greek">ἤγαγον δὲ τὸν παῖδα ζῶντα</span>,<span class="greek"> καὶ παρεκλήθησαν οὐ μετρίωθς</span> ‘they took the young man home alive and were greatly comforted’ Ac 20:12. In Ac 20:12 the phrase <span class="greek">οὐ μετρίως</span>, literally ‘not to a moderate degree,’ is equivalent to a strong positive statement, namely, ‘greatly’ or ‘to a great extent.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4402050"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402050">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going on ahead.” The participle <span class="greek">προελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">proelthontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402051"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402051">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402052"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402052">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Assos</i> was a city of Mysia about 24 mi (40 km) southeast of Troas.</p></p>
<p id="n4402053"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402053">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 628 s.v. <span class="greek">μέλλω</span> 1.c.<span class="greek">γ</span> has “denoting an intended action: <i>intend, propose, have in mind</i>…Ac 17:31; 20:3, 7, 13ab; 23:15; 26:2; 27:30.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402054"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402054">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for he told us to do this.” <i>Grk</i> “for having arranged it this way, he.” The participle <span class="greek">διατεταγμένος</span> (<span class="translit">diatetagmenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. BDAG 237 s.v. <span class="greek">διατάσσω</span> 1 has “<span class="greek">οὕτως διατεταγμένος ἦν</span> <i>he had arranged it so</i> Ac 20:13.” L&amp;N 15.224 has “‘he told us to do this.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402055"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402055">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> A new sentence was begun here in the translation because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence; in Greek this is part of the preceding sentence beginning “We went on ahead.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402056"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402056">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 628 s.v. <span class="greek">μέλλω</span> 1.c.<span class="greek">γ</span> has “denoting an intended action: <i>intend, propose, have in mind</i>…Ac 17:31; 20:3, 7, 13ab; 23:15; 26:2; 27:30.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402057"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402057">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “there on foot.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402058"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402058">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Assos</i> was a city of Mysia about 24 mi (40 km) southeast of Troas.</p></p>
<p id="n4402059"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402059">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “taking him aboard, we.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναλαβόντες</span> (<span class="translit">analabontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402060"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402060">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Mitylene</i> was the most important city on the island of Lesbos in the Aegean Sea. It was about 44 mi (70 km) from Assos.</p></p>
<p id="n4402061"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402061">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “setting sail from there.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποπλεύσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">apopleusantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402062"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402062">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “offshore from Chios.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Chios</i> was an island in the Aegean Sea off the western coast of Asia Minor with a city of the same name.</p></p>
<p id="n4402063"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402063">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “crossed over to,” “arrived at.” L&amp;N 54.12 has “<span class="greek">παραβάλλω</span>: (a technical, nautical term) to sail up to or near—‘to approach, to arrive at, to sail to.’ <span class="greek">παρεβάλομεν εἰς Σάμον</span> ‘we approached Samos’ or ‘we arrived at Samos’ Ac 20:15.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402064"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402064">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Samos</i> is an island in the Aegean Sea off the western coast of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4402065"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402065">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Miletus</i> was a seaport on the western coast of Asia Minor about 40 mi (70 km) south of Ephesus. From Mitylene to Miletus was about 125 mi (200 km).</p></p>
<p id="n4402067"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402067">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that he might not have to spend time.” L&amp;N 67.79 has “<span class="greek">ὅπως μὴ γένηται αὐτῷ χρονοτριβῆσαι ἐν τῇ ᾿Ασίᾳ</span> ‘so as not to spend any time in the province of Asia’ Ac 20:16.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402068"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402068">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n4402069"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402069">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was eager.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402071"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402071">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if it could be to him” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4402072"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402072">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Miletus</i> was a seaport on the western coast of Asia Minor about 45 mi (72 km) south of Ephesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4402073"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402073">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “a message” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4402074"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402074">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to him” are not in the Greek text but are implied. L&amp;N 33.311 has for the verb <span class="greek">μετακαλέομαι</span> (<span class="translit">metakaleomai</span>) “to summon someone, with considerable insistence and authority—‘to summon, to tell to come.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4402075"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402075">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “You yourselves know, from the first day I set foot in Asia, how I was with you the whole time.” This could be understood to mean “how I stayed with you the whole time,” but the following verses make it clear that Paul’s lifestyle while with the Ephesians is in view here. Thus the translation “how I lived the whole time I was with you” makes this clear.</p></p>
<p id="n4402076"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402076">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I arrived.” BDAG 367 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιβαίνω</span> 2, “<i>set foot in…</i><span class="greek">εἰς τ</span>.<span class="greek"> ᾿Ασίαν</span> <i>set foot in Asia</i> Ac 20:18.” However, L&amp;N 15.83 removes the idiom: “you know that since the first day that I came to Asia.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402077"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402077">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; see the note on this word in v. 16.</p></p>
<p id="n4402078"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402078">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>humility</i> see 2 Cor 10:1; 11:7; 1 Thess 2:6; Col 3:12; Eph 4:2; Phil 2:3-11.</p></p>
<p id="n4402079"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402079">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> These <i>plots</i> are mentioned in Acts 9:24; 20:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4402080"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402080">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “declaring.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402081"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402081">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “profitable.” BDAG 960 s.v. <span class="greek">συμφέρω</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">α</span> has “<span class="greek">τὰ συμφέροντα</span> <i>what advances your best interests</i> or <i>what is good for you</i> Ac 20:20, ” but the broader meaning (s.v. 2, “to be advantageous, <i>help, confer a benefit, be profitable</i>/<i>useful</i>”) is equally possible in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4402082"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402082">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “openly.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402083"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402083">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 233 s.v. <span class="greek">διαμαρτύρομαι</span> 1 has “<i>testify of, bear witness to</i> (orig. under oath)…of repentance to Judeans and Hellenes Ac 20:21.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402084"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402084">84</a> <p><b>tc</b> Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, including some of the more significant ones (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><span class="greek"> Α</span> C [D] E 33 36 323 945 1175 1241 1505 1739 <i>pm</i> and a number of versions), read <span class="greek">Χριστόν</span> (<span class="translit">Christon</span>, “Christ”) at the end of this verse. This word is lacking in B H L P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 614 <i>pm</i>. Although the inclusion is supported by many earlier and better <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, internal evidence is on the side of the omission: In Acts, both “Lord Jesus” and “Lord Jesus Christ” occur, though between 16:31 and the end of the book “Lord Jesus Christ” appears only in 28:31, perhaps as a kind of climactic assertion. Thus, the shorter reading is to be preferred.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus</i>. Note the twofold description of the message. It is a turning to God involving faith in Jesus Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n4402085"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402085">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And now, behold.” Here <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402086"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402086">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “bound.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402087"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402087">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> This journey to <i>Jerusalem</i> suggests a parallel between Paul and Jesus, since the “Jerusalem journey” motif figures so prominently in Luke’s Gospel (9:51-19:44).</p></p>
<p id="n4402088"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402088">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 965 s.v. <span class="greek">συναντάω</span> 2 has <span class="greek">τὰ ἐν αὐτῇ συναντήσοντα ἐμοὶ μὴ εἰδώς</span> <i>without knowing what will happen to me there</i> Ac 20:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402089"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402089">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 826 s.v. <span class="greek">πλήν</span> 1.d has “<span class="greek">πλὴν ὅτι</span> <i>except that</i>…Ac 20:23.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402090"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402090">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">διαμαρτύρομαι</span> (<span class="translit">diamarturomai</span>) can mean “warn” (BDAG 233 s.v. <span class="greek">διαμαρτύρομαι</span> 2 has “<i>solemnly urge, exhort, warn</i>…w. dat. of pers. addressed”), and this meaning better fits the context here, although BDAG categorizes Acts 20:23 under the meaning “<i>testify of, bear witness to</i>” (s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4402091"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402091">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek text here reads <span class="greek">κατὰ πόλιν</span> (<span class="translit">kata polin</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402092"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402092">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying that,” but the participle <span class="greek">λέγον</span> (<span class="translit">legon</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402093"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402093">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “bonds.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402094"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402094">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “troubles,” “suffering.” See Acts 19:21; 21:4, 11.</p></p>
<p id="n4402095"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402095">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “soul.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402096"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402096">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I do not consider my life worth a single word.” According to BDAG 599 s.v. <span class="greek">λόγος</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">α</span>, “In the textually uncertain pass. Ac 20:24 the text as it stands in N., <span class="greek">οὐδενὸς λόγου</span> (v.l. <span class="greek">λόγον</span>) <span class="greek">ποιοῦμαι τὴν ψυχὴν τιμίαν</span>, may well mean: <i>I do not consider my life worth a single word</i> (cp. <span class="greek">λόγου ἄξιον</span> [<span class="greek">ἄξιος</span> 1a] and our ‘worth mention’).”</p></p>
<p id="n4402097"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402097">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1106 s.v. <span class="greek">ὡς</span> 9 describes this use as “a final particle, expressing intention/purpose, <i>with a view to, in order to</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402098"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402098">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “course.” See L&amp;N 42.26, “(a figurative extension of meaning of <span class="greek">δρόμος</span> ‘race’) a task or function involving continuity, serious, effort, and possibly obligation—‘task, mission’…Ac 20:24.” On this Pauline theme see also Phil 1:19-26; Col 1:24; 2 Tim 4:6-7.</p></p>
<p id="n4402099"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n4402099">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the gospel.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020100"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And now, behold.” Here <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n44020101"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all of you…will not see.” Greek handles its negation somewhat differently from English, and the translation follows English grammatical conventions.</p></p>
<p id="n44020102"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020102">102</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note how Paul’s usage of the expression <i>proclaiming the kingdom</i> is associated with (and intertwined with) his testifying <i>to the good news of God’s grace</i> in v. 24. For Paul the two concepts were interrelated.</p></p>
<p id="n44020103"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will see my face” (an idiom for seeing someone in person).</p></p>
<p id="n44020104"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “testify.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020105"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “clean, pure,” thus “guiltless” (BDAG 489 s.v. <span class="greek">καθαρός</span> 3.a).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>I am innocent</i>. Paul had a clear conscience, since he had faithfully carried out his responsibility of <i>announcing to</i> (the Ephesians) <i>the whole purpose of God</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n44020106"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “that if any of you should be lost, I am not responsible” (an idiom). According to L&amp;N 33.223, the meaning of the phrase “that I am innocent of the blood of all of you” is “that if any of you should be lost, I am not responsible.” However, due to the length of this phrase and its familiarity to many modern English readers, the translation was kept closer to formal equivalence in this case. The word “you” is not in the Greek text, but is implied; Paul is addressing the Ephesian congregation (in the person of its elders) in both v. 25 and 27. </p></p>
<p id="n44020107"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “did not avoid.” BDAG 1041 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑποστέλλω</span> 2.b has “<i>shrink from, avoid</i> implying fear…<span class="greek">οὐ γὰρ ὑπεστειλάμην τοῦ μὴ ἀναγγεῖλαι</span> <i>I did not shrink from proclaiming</i> Ac 20:27”; L&amp;N 13.160 has “to hold oneself back from doing something, with the implication of some fearful concern—‘to hold back from, to shrink from, to avoid’…‘for I have not held back from announcing to you the whole purpose of God’ Ac 20:27.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020108"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “proclaiming,” “declaring.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020109"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “plan.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020110"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Be on your guard for” (cf. v. 29). Paul completed his responsibility to the Ephesians with this warning.</p></p>
<p id="n44020111"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020112"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “guardians.” BDAG 379-80 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπίσκοπος</span> 2 states, “The term was taken over in Christian communities in ref. to one who served as <i>overseer</i> or <i>supervisor</i>, with special interest in guarding the apostolic tradition…Ac 20:28.” This functional term describes the role of the elders (see v. 17). They were to guard and shepherd the congregation.</p></p>
<p id="n44020113"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020113">113</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading “of God” (<span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">tou theou</span>) is found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B 614 1175 1505 <i>al</i> vg sy; other witnesses have “of the Lord” (<span class="greek">τοῦ κυρίου</span>, <span class="translit">tou kuriou</span>) here (so <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> A C* D E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1739 <i>al</i> co), while the majority of the later minuscule <span class="smcaps">mss</span> conflate these two into “of the Lord and God” (<span class="greek">τοῦ κυρίου καὶ</span> [<span class="greek">τοῦ</span>] <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">tou kuriou kai</span> [<span class="translit">tou</span>]<span class="translit"> theou</span>). Although the evidence is evenly balanced between the first two readings, <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span> is decidedly superior on internal grounds. The final prepositional phrase of this verse, <span class="greek">διὰ τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ ἰδίου</span> (<span class="translit">dia tou haimatos tou idiou</span>), could be rendered “through his own blood” or “through the blood of his own.” In the latter translation, the object that “own” modifies must be supplied (see <b>tn</b> below for discussion). But this would not be entirely clear to scribes; those who supposed that <span class="greek">ἰδίου</span> modified <span class="greek">αἵματος</span> would be prone to alter “God” to “Lord” to avoid the inference that God had blood. In a similar way, later scribes would be prone to conflate the two titles, thereby affirming the deity (with the construction <span class="greek">τοῦ κυρίου καὶ θεοῦ</span> following the Granville Sharp rule and referring to a single person [see <i>ExSyn</i> 272, 276-77, 290]) and substitutionary atonement of Christ. For these reasons, <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span> best explains the rise of the other readings and should be considered authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n44020114"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “acquired.” </p></p>
<p id="n44020115"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with his own blood”; <i>Grk</i> “with the blood of his own.” The genitive construction could be taken in two ways: (1) as an attributive genitive (second attributive position) meaning “his own blood”; or (2) as a possessive genitive, “with the blood of his own.” In this case the referent is the Son, and the referent has been specified in the translation for clarity. See further C. F. DeVine, “The Blood of God,” <i>CBQ</i> 9 (1947): 381-408.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>That he obtained with the blood of his own Son</i>. This is one of only two explicit statements in Luke-Acts highlighting the substitutionary nature of Christ’s death (the other is in Luke 22:19).</p></p>
<p id="n44020116"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “after my departure.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020117"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, people like fierce wolves. See BDAG 167-68 s.v. <span class="greek">βαρύς</span> 4 on the term translated “fierce.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The battle to follow would be a savage one. The imagery of <i>wolves</i> is found in intertestamental Judaism (see <i>Pss. Sol</i>. 8:23, 30; also <i>1 Enoch</i> 89:55). For more on the sheep imagery see H. Preisker and S. Schulz, <i>TDNT</i> 6:690. The imagery of a <i>flock</i> attacked by <i>wolves</i> suggests violence, and serves to prepare Paul’s hearers (the elders of the Ephesian church, v. 17) for the depredations of the false teachers who would arise.</p></p>
<p id="n44020118"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from among yourselves.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020119"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which only rarely is used in a generic sense to refer to both males and females. Since Paul is speaking to the Ephesian elders at this point and there is nothing in the context to suggest women were included in that group (“from among your own group”), it is most likely Paul was not predicting that these false teachers would include women.</p></p>
<p id="n44020120"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “speaking crooked things”; BDAG 237 s.v. <span class="greek">διαστρέφω</span> 2 has “<span class="greek">λαλεῖν διεστραμμένα</span> <i>teach perversions</i> (of the truth) Ac 20:30.”</p><p><b>sn</b> These <i>perversions of the truth</i> refer to the kinds of threats that would undermine repentance toward God and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ (cf. v. 21). Instead these false teachers would arise from within the Ephesian congregation (cf. 1 John 2:18-19) and would seek <i>to draw the disciples away after them</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n44020121"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “be watchful.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020122"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “admonishing.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020123"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “commend.” BDAG 772 s.v. <span class="greek">παρατίθημι</span> 3.b has “<span class="greek">τινά τινι</span> <i>entrust someone to the care</i> or <i>protection of someone</i>…Of divine protection <span class="greek">παρέθεντο αὐτοὺς τῷ κυρίῳ</span> Ac 14:23; cf. 20:32.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020124"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “word.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020125"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the message of his grace, which.” The phrase <span class="greek">τῷ δυναμένῳ οἰκοδομῆσαι</span>… (<span class="translit">tō dunamenō oikodomēsai</span>…) refers to <span class="greek">τῷ λόγω</span> (<span class="translit">tō logō</span>), not <span class="greek">τῆς χάριτος</span> (<span class="translit">tēs charitos</span>); in English it could refer to either “the message” or “grace,” but in Greek, because of agreement in gender, the referent can only be “the message.” To make this clear, a new sentence was begun in the translation and the referent “the message” was repeated at the beginning of this new sentence. </p></p>
<p id="n44020126"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “coveted.” BDAG 371 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιθυμέω</span> 1 has “to have a strong desire to do or secure someth., <i>desire, long for</i> w. gen. of the thing desired…silver, gold, clothing Ac 20:33.” The traditional term “covet” is not in common usage and difficult for many modern English readers to understand. The statement affirms Paul’s integrity. He was not doing this for personal financial gain.</p></p>
<p id="n44020127"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “of mine” are not in the Greek text, but are supplied to clarify whose hands Paul is referring to.</p></p>
<p id="n44020128"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020128">128</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>By all these things</i> means “In everything I did.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020129"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “must assist.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020130"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the sick.” See Eph 4:28.</p></p>
<p id="n44020131"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020131">131</a> <p><b>sn</b> The saying is similar to Matt 10:8. Service and generosity should be abundant. Interestingly, these exact words are not found in the gospels. Paul must have known of this saying from some other source.</p></p>
<p id="n44020132"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n44020133"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “kneeling down…he prayed.” The participle <span class="greek">θείς</span> (<span class="translit">theis</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44020134"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “weeping a great deal,” thus “loudly” (BDAG 472 s.v. <span class="greek">ἱκανός</span> and BDAG 546 s.v. <span class="greek">κλαυθμός</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n44020135"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fell on Paul’s neck” (an idiom, see BDAG 1014 s.v. <span class="greek">τράχηλος</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n44020136"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020136">136</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Ephesians elders <i>kissed</i> Paul as a sign of both affection and farewell. The entire scene shows how much interrelationship Paul had in his ministry and how much he and the Ephesians meant to each other.</p></p>
<p id="n44020137"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “pained.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020138"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the word that he had said.”</p></p>
<p id="n44020139"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020139">139</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to see his face” (an idiom for seeing someone in person).</p></p>
<p id="n44020140"><a href="file1082.xhtml#n44020140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 873 s.v. <span class="greek">προπέμπω</span> 1 has “<i>they accompanied him to the ship</i> Ac 20:38.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
