<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 6</h2>
<p id="n660061"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n660061">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying like a voice [or sound] of thunder.”</p></p>
<p id="n660062"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n660062">2</a> <p><b>tc</b> The addition of “and see” (<span class="greek">καὶ ἴδε</span> or <span class="greek">καὶ βλέπε</span> [<span class="translit">kai ide</span> or <span class="translit">kai blepe</span>]) to “come” (<span class="greek">ἔρχου</span>, <span class="translit">erchou</span>) in 6:1, 3-5, 7 is a gloss directed to John, i.e., “come <i>and look</i> at the seals and the horsemen!” But the command <span class="greek">ἔρχου</span> is better interpreted as directed to each of the horsemen. The shorter reading also has the support of the better witnesses.</p></p>
<p id="n660063"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n660063">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of hearing the voice summon the first rider.</p></p>
<p id="n660064"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n660064">4</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading “and I looked” (<span class="greek">καὶ εἶδον</span>, <span class="translit">kai eidon</span>) or some slight variation (e.g., <span class="greek">ἶδον</span>, <span class="translit">idon</span>) has excellent ms support (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C P 1611) and its omission seems to come through the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that have already placed “and look” (<span class="greek">καὶ ἴδε</span> or <span class="greek">καὶ βλέπε</span> [<span class="translit">kai ide</span> or <span class="translit">kai blepe</span>]) after the verb “come” (<span class="greek">ἔρχου</span>, <span class="translit">erchou</span>) as mentioned in the text-critical note on 6:1. Thus, for these copyists it was redundant to add “and I looked” again.</p></p>
<p id="n660065"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n660065">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “and here came” expresses the sense of <span class="greek">καὶ ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">kai idou</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n660066"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n660066">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n660067"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n660067">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one sitting on it.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The one who rode it</i>. The identity of the first rider on the <i>white horse</i> has been discussed at great length by interpreters. Several answers are given: (1) A number understand the rider on the white horse to be Christ himself, identifying this horse and rider with the one mentioned in 19:11, where the identification is clear (cf. 19:13, 16). It must be noted, though, that there is little in common between the two riders beyond the white horse. The word for “crown” is different, the armament is different, and the context here is different (conquest vs. retribution), with three other horsemen bringing catastrophe following. (2) Others see the rider on the white horse representing a spirit of military conquest that dominates human history and leads to the catastrophes that follow. (3) Another possibility is that the white horse rider represents the Antichrist, who appears later in Rev 11:7; 13:17, and is similar to Christ in 19:11 in that they both ride a white horse. This interpretation has been discussed at length by M. Rissi, “The Rider on the White Horse: A Study of Revelation 6:1-8, ” <i>Int</i> 18 (1964): 407-18. This interpretation is the most probable one.</p></p>
<p id="n660068"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n660068">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>crown</i> in Rev 3:11.</p></p>
<p id="n660069"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n660069">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">νικῶν</span> (<span class="translit">nikōn</span>) has been translated as substantival, the subject of the verb <span class="greek">ἐξῆλθεν</span> (<span class="translit">exēlthen</span>). Otherwise, as an adverbial participle of manner, it is somewhat redundant: “he rode out conquering and to conquer.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600610"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600611"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the Lamb) has been specified in the translation for clarity here and throughout the rest of the chapter.</p></p>
<p id="n6600612"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 79.31 states, “‘fiery red’ (probably with a tinge of yellow or orange).”</p></p>
<p id="n6600613"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one sitting on it.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600614"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “permission” is implied; <i>Grk</i> “it was given to him to take peace from the earth.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600615"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 979 s.v. <span class="greek">σφάζω</span> states, “Of the killing of a person by violence…<span class="greek">σφάζειν τινά</span> <i>butcher</i> or <i>murder someone</i> (4 Km 10:7; Jer 52:10; Manetho: 609 fgm. 8, 76 Jac. [in Jos., C. Ap. 1, 76]; Demetr.[?]: 722 fgm. 7; Ar. 10, 9) 1J 3:12; Rv 6:4. Pass. (Hdt. 5, 5) 5:9; 6:9; 18:24.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600616"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600617"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the summons by the third creature.</p></p>
<p id="n6600618"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600618">18</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading “and I looked” (<span class="greek">καὶ εἶδον</span>, <span class="translit">kai eidon</span>) or some slight variation (e.g., <span class="greek">ἶδον</span>, <span class="translit">idon</span>) has excellent ms support (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C P 1611) and its omission seems to have come through the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that have already placed “and look” (<span class="greek">καὶ ἴδε</span> or <span class="greek">καὶ βλέπε</span> [<span class="translit">kai ide</span> or <span class="translit">kai blepe</span>]) after the verb “come” (<span class="greek">ἔρχου</span>, <span class="translit">erchou</span>) in 6:1. Thus, for these copyists it was redundant to add “and I looked” again.</p></p>
<p id="n6600619"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “and here came” expresses the sense of <span class="greek">καὶ ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">kai idou</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6600620"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600621"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one sitting on it.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600622"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600622">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>A balance scale</i> would have been a rod held by a rope in the middle with pans attached to both ends for measuring.</p></p>
<p id="n6600623"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600623">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600624"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1086 s.v. <span class="greek">χοῖνιξ</span> states, “a dry measure, oft. used for grain, approximately equivalent to one quart or one liter<i>, quart</i>. A <span class="greek">χ</span>.of grain was a daily ration for one pers.…Rv 6:6ab.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600625"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600625">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a quart of wheat for a denarius.” A denarius was one day’s pay for an average worker. The words “will cost” are used to indicate the genitive of price or value; otherwise the English reader could understand the phrase to mean “a quart of wheat to be given as a day’s pay.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600626"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600626">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6600627"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600628"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600628">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the summons by the fourth creature.</p></p>
<p id="n6600629"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600629">29</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading “and I looked” (<span class="greek">καὶ εἶδον</span>, <span class="translit">kai eidon</span>) or some slight variation (e.g., <span class="greek">ἶδον</span>, <span class="translit">idon</span>) has excellent ms support (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C P 1611) and its omission seems to have come through the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that have already placed “and look” (<span class="greek">καὶ ἴδε</span> or <span class="greek">καὶ βλέπε</span> [<span class="translit">kai ide</span> or <span class="translit">kai blepe</span>]) after the verb “come” (<span class="greek">ἔρχου</span>, <span class="translit">erchou</span>) in 6:1. Thus, for these copyists it was redundant to add “and I looked” again.</p></p>
<p id="n6600630"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “and here came” expresses the sense of <span class="greek">καὶ ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">kai idou</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6600631"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600631">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> A sickly pallor, when referring to persons, or the green color of plants. BDAG 1085 s.v. <span class="greek">χλωρός</span> 2 states, “<i>pale, greenish gray</i>…as the color of a pers. in sickness contrasted with appearance in health…so the horse ridden by Death…<span class="greek">ἵππος χλωρός</span> Rv 6:8.” Because the color of the horse is symbolic, “pale green” is used in the translation. Cf. NIV, NCV “pale”; NASB “ashen.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600632"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600633"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600633">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one sitting on it.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600634"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600634">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Hades was following with him.” The Greek expression <span class="greek">μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">met’ autou</span>, “with him”) is Semitic and indicates close proximity. The translation “followed right behind” reflects this.</p></p>
<p id="n6600635"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600635">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6600636"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600636">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600637"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600637">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with death.” <span class="greek">θάνατος</span> (<span class="translit">thanatos</span>) can in particular contexts refer to a manner of death, specifically a contagious disease (see BDAG 443 s.v. 3; L&amp;N 23.158).</p></p>
<p id="n6600638"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600638">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the introduction of a new and somewhat different topic after the introduction of the four riders.</p></p>
<p id="n6600639"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600639">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “murdered.” See the note on the word “butcher” in 6:4.</p></p>
<p id="n6600640"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600640">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600641"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600641">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “voice, saying”; the participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated here. </p></p>
<p id="n6600642"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600642">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression <span class="greek">ἕως πότε</span> (<span class="translit">eōs pote</span>) was translated “how long.” Cf. BDAG 423 s.v. <span class="greek">ἕως</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">γ</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n6600643"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600643">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here is <span class="greek">δεσπότης</span> (<span class="translit">despotēs</span>; see L&amp;N 37.63).</p></p>
<p id="n6600644"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600644">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600645"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600645">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “until they had been completed.” The idea of a certain “number” of people is implied by the subject of <span class="greek">πληρωθῶσιν</span> (<span class="translit">plērōthōsin</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6600646"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600646">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though <span class="greek">σύνδουλος</span> (<span class="translit">sundoulos</span>) has been translated “fellow servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6600647"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600647">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600648"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600648">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “powerful”; <i>Grk</i> “a great.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600649"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600649">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “like hairy sackcloth” (L&amp;N 8.13).</p></p>
<p id="n6600650"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600650">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “like blood,” understanding <span class="greek">αἷμα</span> (<span class="translit">aima</span>) as a blood-red color rather than actual blood (L&amp;N 8.64).</p></p>
<p id="n6600651"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600651">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in heaven” (the same Greek word means both “heaven” and “sky”). The genitive <span class="greek">τοῦ οὐρανοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou ouranou</span>) is taken as a genitive of place.</p></p>
<p id="n6600652"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600652">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “throws [off]”; the indicative verb has been translated as a participle due to English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600653"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600653">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 3.37 states, “a fig produced late in the summer season (and often falling off before it ripens)—‘late fig.’ <span class="greek">ὡς συκὴ βάλλει τοὺς ὀλύνθους αὐτῆς ὑπὸ ἀνέμου μεγάλου σειομένη</span> ‘as the fig tree sheds its late figs when shaken by a great wind’ Re 6:13. In the only context in which <span class="greek">ὄλυνθος</span> occurs in the NT (Re 6:13), one may employ an expression such as ‘unripe fig’ or ‘fig which ripens late.’”</p></p>
<p id="n6600654"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600654">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “great wind.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600655"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600655">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The heavens were.” The Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) can mean either “heaven” or “sky.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600656"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600656">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 125 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀποχωρίζω</span> states, “<span class="greek">ὁ οὐρανὸς ἀπεχωρίσθη</span> <i>the sky was split</i> Rv 6:14.” Although L&amp;N 79.120 gives the meaning “the sky disappeared like a rolled-up scroll” here, a scroll that is rolled up does not “disappear,” and such a translation could be difficult for modern readers to understand.</p></p>
<p id="n6600657"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600657">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 317 s.v. <span class="greek">ἑλίσσω</span> states, “<span class="greek">ὡς βιβλίον ἑλισσόμενον</span> <i>like a scroll that is rolled up</i>…Rv 6:14.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600658"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600658">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600659"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600659">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated; nor is it translated before each of the following categories, since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n6600660"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600660">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “chiliarchs.” A chiliarch was normally a military officer commanding a thousand soldiers, but here probably used of higher-ranking commanders like generals (see L&amp;N 55.15; cf. Rev 6:15).</p></p>
<p id="n6600661"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600661">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6600662"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600662">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600663"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600663">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> It is difficult to say where this quotation ends. The translation ends it after “withstand it” at the end of v. 17, but it is possible that it should end here, after “Lamb” at the end of v. 16. If it ends after “Lamb,” v. 17 is a parenthetical explanation by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n6600664"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600664">64</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A <span class="apparatus">M</span> bo) change the pronoun “their” to “his” (<span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">autou</span>) in order to bring the text in line with the mention of the one seated on the throne in the immediately preceding verse, and to remove the ambiguity about whose wrath is in view here. The reading <span class="greek">αὐτῶν</span> (<span class="translit">autōn</span>, “their”) is well supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C 1611 1854 2053 2329 2344 latt sy. On both internal and external grounds, it should be regarded as autographic.</p></p>
<p id="n6600665"><a href="file1239.xhtml#n6600665">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “to withstand (it)” for <span class="greek">ἵστημι</span> (<span class="translit">histēmi</span>) is based on the imagery of holding one’s ground in a military campaign or an attack (BDAG 482 s.v. B.4).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
