<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for John 7</h2>
<p id="n430071"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n430071">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> Again, the transition is indicated by the imprecise temporal indicator <i>After this</i>. Clearly, though, the author has left out much of the events of Jesus’ ministry, because chap. 6 took place near the Passover (6:4). This would have been the Passover between winter/spring of <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 32, just one year before Jesus’ crucifixion (assuming a date of <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 33 for the crucifixion), or the Passover of winter/spring <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 29, assuming a date of <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 30 for the crucifixion.</p></p>
<p id="n430072"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n430072">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus was traveling around in Galilee.”</p></p>
<p id="n430073"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n430073">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For he.” Here <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>, “for”) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n430074"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n430074">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he did not want to travel around in Judea.”</p></p>
<p id="n430075"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n430075">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” In NT usage the term <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαῖοι</span> (<span class="translit">Ioudaioi</span>) may refer to the entire Jewish people, the residents of Jerusalem and surrounding territory, the authorities in Jerusalem, or merely those who were hostile to Jesus. (For further information see R. G. Bratcher, “‘The Jews’ in the Gospel of John,” <i>BT</i> 26 [1975]: 401-9.) Here the phrase should be restricted to the Jewish authorities or leaders who were Jesus’ primary opponents.</p></p>
<p id="n430076"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n430076">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “were seeking.”</p></p>
<p id="n430077"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n430077">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Feast of Tabernacles” or Or “Feast of Booths” (the feast where people lived in tents or huts, which was celebrated in the autumn after harvest). John’s use of <span class="greek">σκηνοπηγία</span> (<span class="translit">skēnopēgia</span>) for the Feast of Shelters constitutes the only use of this term in the New Testament.</p></p>
<p id="n430078"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n430078">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> Since the present verse places these incidents at the <i>Feast of Shelters</i> (<span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 29 or 32, depending on whether one dates the crucifixion in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 30 or 33) there would have been a 6-month interval during which no events are recorded. The author is obviously selective in his approach; he is not recording an exhaustive history (as he will later tell the reader in John 21:25). After healing the paralytic on the Sabbath in Jerusalem (John 5:1-47), Jesus withdrew again to Galilee because of mounting opposition. In Galilee the feeding of the 5,000 took place, which marked the end of the Galilean ministry for all practical purposes. John 7:1-9 thus marks Jesus’ final departure from Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n430079"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n430079">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his brothers.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Jesus</i>’ <i>brothers</i>. Jesus’ brothers (really his half brothers) were mentioned previously by John in 2:12 (see the note on <i>brothers</i> there). They are also mentioned elsewhere in Matt 13:55 and Mark 6:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4300710"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300710">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “your deeds that you are doing.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Should the advice by Jesus’ brothers, <i>Leave here and go to Judea so your disciples may see your miracles that you are performing</i>, be understood as a suggestion that he should attempt to win back the disciples who had deserted him earlier (6:66)? Perhaps. But it is also possible to take the words as indicating that if Jesus is going to put forward messianic claims (i.e., through miraculous signs) then he should do so in Jerusalem, not in the remote parts of Galilee. Such an understanding seems to fit better with the following verse. It would also indicate misunderstanding on the part of Jesus’ brothers of the true nature of his mission—he did not come as the royal Messiah of Jewish apocalyptic expectation, to be enthroned as king at this time.</p></p>
<p id="n4300711"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300711">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “seeks to be well known.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300712"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300712">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>No one who seeks to make a reputation for himself does anything in secret</i> means, in effect: “if you’re going to perform signs to authenticate yourself as Messiah, you should do them at Jerusalem.” (Jerusalem is where mainstream Jewish apocalyptic tradition held that Messiah would appear.)</p></p>
<p id="n4300713"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300713">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4300714"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300714">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then Jesus said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300715"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300715">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “my opportunity.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300716"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300716">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is not yet here.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300717"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300717">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “your time is always ready.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300718"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300718">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> One always speaks of “going <i>up</i>” to Jerusalem in Jewish idiom, even though in western thought it is more common to speak of south as “down” (Jerusalem lies south of Galilee). The reason for the idiom is that Jerusalem was identified with Mount Zion in the OT, so that altitude was the issue.</p></p>
<p id="n4300719"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300719">19</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> B L T W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 070 0105 0250 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> sa), including most of the better witnesses, have “not yet” (<span class="greek">οὔπω</span>, <span class="translit">oupō</span>) here. Those with the reading <span class="greek">οὐκ</span> are not as impressive (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> D K 1241 <i>al</i> lat), but <span class="greek">οὐκ</span> is the more difficult reading here, especially because it stands in tension with v. 10. On the one hand, it is possible that <span class="greek">οὐκ</span> arose because of homoioarcton: A copyist who saw <span class="uncial">oupw</span> wrote <span class="uncial">ouk</span>. However, it is more likely that <span class="greek">οὔπω</span> was introduced early on to harmonize with what is said two verses later. As for Jesus’ refusal to go up to the feast in v. 8, the statement does not preclude action of a different kind at a later point. Jesus may simply have been refusing to accompany his brothers with the rest of the group of pilgrims, preferring to travel separately and “in secret” (v. 10) with his disciples.</p></p>
<p id="n4300720"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the word is <span class="greek">καιρός</span> (<span class="translit">kairos</span>) here, it parallels John’s use of <span class="greek">ὥρα</span> (<span class="translit">hōra</span>) elsewhere as a reference to the time appointed for Jesus by the Father—the time of his return to the Father, characterized by his death, resurrection, and ascension (glorification). In the Johannine literature, synonyms are often interchanged for no apparent reason other than stylistic variation.</p></p>
<p id="n4300721"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300721">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “my time has not yet come to an end” (a possible hint of Jesus’ death at Jerusalem); <i>Grk</i> “my time is not yet fulfilled.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300722"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300722">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300723"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300723">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” Here the phrase refers to the Jewish authorities or leaders who were Jesus’ primary opponents. See the note on the phrase “the Jewish leaders” in v. 1.</p></p>
<p id="n4300724"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300724">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Where is that one?”</p></p>
<p id="n4300725"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300725">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And there was.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300726"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300726">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “complaining.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300727"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300727">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “among the common people” (as opposed to the religious authorities mentioned in the previous verse).</p></p>
<p id="n4300728"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300728">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the crowd.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300729"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300729">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” Here the phrase refers to the Jewish authorities or leaders who were Jesus’ primary opponents. See also the note on the phrase “the Jewish leaders” in v. 1.</p></p>
<p id="n4300730"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300730">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the temple.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300731"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300731">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “started teaching.” An ingressive sense for the imperfect verb (“began to teach” or “started teaching”) fits well here, since the context implies that Jesus did not start his teaching at the beginning of the festival, but began when it was about half over.</p></p>
<p id="n4300732"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300732">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” Here the phrase refers to the Jewish authorities or leaders who were Jesus’ primary opponents. See the note on the phrase “the Jewish leaders” in v. 1.</p></p>
<p id="n4300733"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300733">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “began to be astonished.” This imperfect verb could also be translated ingressively (“began to be astonished”), but for English stylistic reasons it is rendered as a simple past.</p></p>
<p id="n4300734"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300734">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “How does this man know learning since he has not been taught?” The implication here is not that Jesus never went to school (in all probability he did attend a local synagogue school while a youth), but that he was not the disciple of a particular rabbi and had not had formal or advanced instruction under a recognized rabbi (compare Acts 4:13 where a similar charge is made against Peter and John; see also Paul’s comment in Acts 22:3).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>He has never had formal instruction</i>. Ironically when the Jewish leaders came face-to-face with the Word become flesh—the preexistent <i>Logos</i>, creator of the universe and divine Wisdom personified—they treated him as an untaught, unlearned person, without the formal qualifications to be a teacher.</p></p>
<p id="n4300735"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300735">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So Jesus answered and said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300736"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300736">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “the one who sent me” refers to God.</p></p>
<p id="n4300737"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300737">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his will.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300738"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300738">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “or whether I speak from myself.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300739"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300739">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who speaks from himself.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300740"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300740">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “seeks.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300741"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300741">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “praise”; <i>Grk</i> “glory.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300742"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300742">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “seeks.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300743"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300743">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “praise”; <i>Grk</i> “glory.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300744"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300744">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is truthful”; <i>Grk</i> “is true.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300745"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300745">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “accomplishes”; <i>Grk</i> “does.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300746"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300746">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seek.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300747"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300747">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The common people” (as opposed to the religious authorities mentioned in 7:15).</p></p>
<p id="n4300748"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300748">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “You have a demon!”</p></p>
<p id="n4300749"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300749">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Who is seeking to kill you?”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Who is trying to kill you?</i> Many of the crowd (if they had come in from surrounding regions for the feast) probably were ignorant of any plot. The plot was on the part of the Jewish leaders. Note how carefully John distinguishes between the leadership and the general populace in their respective responses to Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4300750"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300750">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus answered and said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300751"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300751">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I did one deed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300752"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300752">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> The “one miracle” that caused them all to be <i>amazed</i> was the last previous public miracle in Jerusalem recorded by the author, the healing of the paralyzed man in John 5:1-9 on the Sabbath. (The synoptic gospels record other Sabbath healings, but John does not mention them.)</p></p>
<p id="n4300753"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300753">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “gave you circumcision.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300754"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300754">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a man.” While the text literally reads “circumcise a man” in actual fact the practice of circumcising male infants on the eighth day after birth (see Phil 3:5) is primarily what is in view here.</p></p>
<p id="n4300755"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300755">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a man.” See the note on “male child” in the previous verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4300756"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300756">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “receives circumcision.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300757"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300757">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>If a male child is circumcised on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses is not broken</i>. The Rabbis counted 248 parts to a man’s body. In the Talmud (<i>b. Yoma</i> 85b) R. Eleazar ben Azariah (ca. <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 100) states: “If circumcision, which attaches to one only of the 248 members of the human body, suspends the Sabbath, how much more shall the saving of the whole body suspend the Sabbath?” So absolutely binding did rabbinic Judaism regard the command of Lev 12:3 to circumcise on the eighth day, that in the Mishnah <i>m. Shabbat</i> 18.3; 19.1, 2; and <i>m. Nedarim</i> 3.11 all hold that the command to circumcise overrides the command to observe the Sabbath.</p></p>
<p id="n4300758"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300758">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “made an entire man well.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300759"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300759">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “based on sight.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300760"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300760">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “honest”; <i>Grk</i> “righteous.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300762"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300762">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Is it not this one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300763"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300763">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seeking.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300764"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300764">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “speaking openly.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300765"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300765">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They are saying nothing to him</i>. Some people who had heard Jesus were so impressed with his teaching that they began to infer from the inactivity of the opposing Jewish leaders a tacit acknowledgment of Jesus’ claims.</p></p>
<p id="n4300766"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300766">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the rulers.” In context this refers to the Jewish leaders.</p></p>
<p id="n4300767"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300767">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300768"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300768">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah” (Both Greek “Christ” and Hebrew and Aramaic “Messiah” mean “one who has been anointed”).</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:20.</p></p>
<p id="n4300769"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300769">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300770"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300770">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>We know where this man comes from</i>. The author apparently did not consider this objection worth answering. The true facts about Jesus’ origins were readily available for any reader who didn’t know already. Here is an instance where the author assumes knowledge about Jesus that is independent from the material he records.</p></p>
<p id="n4300771"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300771">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah” (Both Greek “Christ” and Hebrew and Aramaic “Messiah” mean “one who has been anointed”).</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:20.</p></p>
<p id="n4300772"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300772">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> The view of these people regarding the Messiah that <i>no one will know where he comes from</i> reflects the idea that the origin of the Messiah is a mystery. In the Talmud (<i>b. Sanhedrin</i> 97a) Rabbi Zera taught: “Three come unawares: Messiah, a found article, and a scorpion.” Apparently OT prophetic passages like Mal 3:1 and Dan 9:25 were interpreted by some as indicating a sudden appearance of Messiah. It appears that this was not a universal view: The scribes summoned by Herod at the coming of the Magi in Matt 2 knew that the Messiah was to be born in Bethlehem. It is important to remember that Jewish messianic expectations in the early 1st century were not monolithic.</p></p>
<p id="n4300773"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300773">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300774"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300774">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then Jesus cried out in the temple, teaching and saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300775"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300775">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>You both know me and know where I come from!</i> Jesus’ response while teaching in the temple is difficult—it appears to concede too much understanding to his opponents. It is best to take the words as irony: “So you know me and know where I am from, do you?” On the physical, literal level, they did know where he was from: Nazareth of Galilee (at least they thought they knew). But on another deeper (spiritual) level, they did not: He came from heaven, from the Father. Jesus insisted that he has not come on his own initiative (cf. 5:37), but at the bidding of the Father who sent him.</p></p>
<p id="n4300776"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300776">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And I have not come from myself.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300777"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300777">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “the one who sent me” refers to God.</p></p>
<p id="n4300778"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300778">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one who sent me is true, whom you do not know.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300779"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300779">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the conjunction “but” is not in the Greek text, the contrast is implied (an omitted conjunction is called <i>asyndeton</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n4300780"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300780">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> The preposition <span class="greek">παρά</span> (<span class="translit">para</span>) followed by the genitive has the local sense preserved and can be used of one person sending another. This does not necessarily imply origin in essence or eternal generation.</p></p>
<p id="n4300781"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300781">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and that one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300782"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300782">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> Here the response is on the part of the crowd, who tried to <i>seize Jesus</i>. This is apparently distinct from the attempted arrest by the authorities mentioned in 7:32.</p></p>
<p id="n4300783"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300783">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300784"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300784">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The common people” (as opposed to the religious authorities).</p></p>
<p id="n4300785"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300785">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah” (Both Greek “Christ” and Hebrew and Aramaic “Messiah” mean “one who has been anointed”).</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:20.</p></p>
<p id="n4300786"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300786">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> Questions prefaced with <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) in Greek anticipate a negative answer. This can sometimes be indicated by using a “tag” at the end in English (here it is “will he?”).</p></p>
<p id="n4300787"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300787">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 1:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4300788"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300788">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The common people” (as opposed to the religious authorities like the Pharisees).</p></p>
<p id="n4300789"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300789">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300790"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300790">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “servants.” The “chief priests and Pharisees” is a comprehensive term for the groups represented in the ruling council (the Sanhedrin) as in John 7:45; 18:3; Acts 5:22, 26. As “servants” or “officers” of the Sanhedrin their representatives should be distinguished from the Levites serving as temple police (perhaps John 7:30 and 44; also John 8:20; 10:39; 19:6; Acts 4:3). Even when performing “police” duties such as here, their “officers” are doing so only as part of their general tasks (see K. H. Rengstorf, <i>TDNT</i> 8:540).</p></p>
<p id="n4300791"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300791">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to seize him.” In the context of a deliberate attempt by the servants of the chief priests and Pharisees to detain Jesus, the English verb “arrest” conveys the point more effectively.</p></p>
<p id="n4300792"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300792">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Yet a little I am with you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300793"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300793">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “then” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4300794"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300794">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seek me.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300795"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300795">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” In NT usage the term <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαῖοι</span> (<span class="translit">Ioudaioi</span>) may refer to the entire Jewish people, the residents of Jerusalem and surrounding territory, the authorities in Jerusalem, or merely those who were hostile to Jesus. (For further information see R. G. Bratcher, “‘The Jews’ in the Gospel of John,” <i>BT</i> 26 [1975]: 401-9.) Here the phrase is understood to refer to the Jewish authorities or leaders, since the Jewish leaders are mentioned in this context both before and after the present verse (7:32, 45).</p></p>
<p id="n4300796"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300796">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300797"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300797">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will not find him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300798"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300798">98</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Jewish people dispersed</i> (<i>Grk</i> “He is not going to the <i>Diaspora</i>”). The Greek term <i>diaspora</i> (“dispersion”) originally meant those Jews not living in Palestine, but <i>dispersed</i> or scattered among the Gentiles.</p></p>
<p id="n4300799"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n4300799">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> Questions prefaced with <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) in Greek anticipate a negative answer. This can sometimes be indicated by using a “tag” at the end in English (here the tag is “is he?”).</p><p><b>sn</b> Note the Jewish opponents’ misunderstanding of Jesus’ words, as made clear in vv. 35-36. They didn’t realize he spoke of his departure out of the world. This is another example of the author’s use of misunderstanding as a literary device to emphasize a point.</p></p>
<p id="n43007100"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “What is this word that he said.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007101"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seek me.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007102"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007102">102</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is a problem with the identification of this reference to the <i>last day of the feast, the greatest day</i>: It appears from Deut 16:13 that the feast went for seven days. Lev 23:36, however, makes it plain that there was an eighth day, though it was mentioned separately from the seven. It is not completely clear whether the seventh or eighth day was the climax of the feast, called here by the author the “last great day of the feast.” Since according to the Mishnah (<i>m. Sukkah</i> 4.1) the ceremonies with water and lights did not continue after the seventh day, it seems more probable that this is the day the author mentions.</p></p>
<p id="n43007103"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus stood up and cried out, saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007104"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> An alternate way of punctuating the Greek text of vv. 37-38 results in this translation: “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink. The one who believes in me, just as the scripture says, ‘From within him will flow rivers of living water.’” John 7:37-38 has been the subject of considerable scholarly debate. Certainly Jesus picks up on the <i>literal</i> water used in the ceremony and uses it figuratively. But what does the figure mean? According to popular understanding, it refers to the coming of the Holy Spirit to dwell in the believer. There is some difficulty in locating an OT text which speaks of rivers of water flowing from within such a person, but Isa 58:11 is often suggested: “The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will continually lead you, he will feed you even in parched regions. He will give you renewed strength, and you will be like a well-watered garden, like a spring that continually produces water.” Other passages which have been suggested are Prov 4:23 and 5:15; Isa 44:3 and 55:1; Ezek 47:1 ff.; Joel 3:18; and Zech 13:1 and 14:8. The meaning in this case is that when anyone comes to believe in Jesus the scriptures referring to the activity of the Holy Spirit in a person’s life are fulfilled. “When the believer comes to Christ and drinks he not only slakes his thirst but receives such an abundant supply that veritable rivers flow from him” (L. Morris, <i>John</i> [NICNT], 424-25). In other words, with this view, the believer himself becomes the source of the living water. This is the traditional understanding of the passage, often called the “Eastern interpretation” following Origen, Athanasius, and the Greek Fathers. It is supported by such modern scholars as Barrett, Behm, Bernard, Cadman, Carson, R. H. Lightfoot, Lindars, Michaelis, Morris, Odeberg, Schlatter, Schweizer, C. H. Turner, M. M. B. Turner, Westcott, and Zahn. In addition it is represented by the following Greek texts and translations: KJV, RSV, NASB, NA<sup>28</sup>, and UBS<sup>5</sup>. D. A. Carson, <i>John</i>, 322-29, has a thorough discussion of the issues and evidence although he opts for the previous interpretation. There is another interpretation possible, however, called the “Western interpretation” because of patristic support by Justin, Hippolytus, Tertullian, and Irenaeus. Modern scholars who favor this view are Abbott, Beasley-Murray, Bishop, Boismard, Braun, Brown, Bullinger, Bultmann, Burney, Dodd, Dunn, Guilding, R. Harris, Hoskyns, Jeremias, Loisy, D. M. Stanley, Thüsing, N. Turner, and Zerwick. This view is represented by the translation in the RSV margin and by the NEB. It is also sometimes called the “christological interpretation” because it makes Jesus himself the source of the living water in v. 38, by punctuating as follows: (37b) <span class="greek">ἐάν τις διψᾷ ἐρχέσθω πρός με</span>,<span class="greek"> καὶ πινέτω</span> (38) <span class="greek">ὁ πιστεύων εἰς ἐμέ</span>.<span class="greek"> Καθὼς εἶπεν ἡ γραφή</span>,<span class="greek"> ποταμοὶ ἐκ τῆς κοιλίας αὐτοῦ ῥεύσουσιν ὕδατος ζῶντος</span>. Three crucial questions are involved in the solution of this problem: (1) punctuation; (2) determining the antecedent of <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">autou</span>); and (3) the source of the scripture quotation. With regard to (1) <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66</sup> does place a full stop after <span class="greek">πινέτω</span> (<span class="translit">pinetō</span>), but this may be theologically motivated and could have been added later. Grammatical and stylistic arguments are inconclusive. More important is (2) the determination of the antecedent of <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span>. Can any other Johannine parallels be found which make the believer the source of the living water? John 4:14 is often mentioned in this regard, but unlike 4:14 the water here becomes a source for others also. Neither does 14:12 provide a parallel. Furthermore, such an interpretation becomes even more problematic in light of the explanation given in v. 39 that the water refers to the Holy Spirit, since it is extremely difficult to see the individual believer becoming the ‘source’ of the Spirit for others. On the other hand, the Gospel of John repeatedly places Jesus himself in this role as source of the living water: 4:10, of course, for the water itself, but according to 20:22 Jesus provides the Spirit (cf. 14:16). Furthermore, the symbolism of 19:34 is difficult to explain as anything other than a deliberate allusion to what is predicted here. This also explains why the Spirit cannot come to the disciples unless Jesus “departs” (16:7). As to (3) the source of the scripture quotation, M. E. Boismard has argued that John is using a targumic rendering of Ps 78:15-16 which describes the water brought forth from the rock in the wilderness by Moses (“Les citations targumiques dans le quatrième évangile,” <i>RB</i> 66 [1959]: 374-78). The frequency of Exodus motifs in the Fourth Gospel (paschal lamb, bronze serpent, manna from heaven) leads quite naturally to the supposition that the author is here drawing on the account of Moses striking the rock in the wilderness to bring forth water (Num 20:8 ff.). That such imagery was readily identified with Jesus in the early church is demonstrated by Paul’s understanding of the event in 1 Cor 10:4. Jesus is the Rock from which the living water—the Spirit—will flow. Carson (see note above) discusses this imagery although he favors the traditional or “Eastern” interpretation. In summary, the latter or “Western” interpretation is to be preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n43007105"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “out of the innermost part of his person”; <i>Grk</i> “out of his belly.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007106"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007106">106</a> <p><b>sn</b> An OT quotation whose source is difficult to determine. Isa 44:3; 55:1; 58:11; and Zech 14:8 have all been suggested.</p></p>
<p id="n43007107"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the Spirit was not yet.” Although only B and a handful of other NT <span class="smcaps">mss</span> supply the participle <span class="greek">δεδομένον</span> (<span class="translit">dedomenon</span>), this is followed in the translation to avoid misunderstanding by the modern English reader that prior to this time the Spirit did not exist. John’s phrase is expressed from a human standpoint and has nothing to do with the preexistence of the third Person of the Godhead. The meaning is that the era of the Holy Spirit had not yet arrived; the Spirit was not as yet at work in a way he later would be because Jesus had not yet returned to his Father. Cf. also Acts 19:2.</p></p>
<p id="n43007108"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007108">108</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n43007109"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The common people” (as opposed to the religious authorities like the chief priests and Pharisees).</p></p>
<p id="n43007110"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “truly.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007111"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007111">111</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Prophet</i> is a reference to the “prophet like Moses” of Deut 18:15, by this time an eschatological figure in popular belief.</p></p>
<p id="n43007112"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah” (Both Greek “Christ” and Hebrew and Aramaic “Messiah” mean “one who has been anointed”).</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:20.</p></p>
<p id="n43007113"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> An initial negative reply (“No”) is suggested by the causal or explanatory <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) which begins the clause.</p></p>
<p id="n43007114"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> Questions prefaced with <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) in Greek anticipate a negative answer. This can sometimes be indicated by using a “tag” at the end in English (here the tag is “does he?”).</p></p>
<p id="n43007115"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is from the seed” (an idiom for human descent).</p></p>
<p id="n43007116"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007116">116</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 89:4.</p></p>
<p id="n43007117"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007117">117</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Mic 5:2.</p></p>
<p id="n43007118"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the village where David was.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007119"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “among the common people” (as opposed to the religious authorities like the chief priests and Pharisees).</p></p>
<p id="n43007120"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n43007121"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007121">121</a> <p><b>sn</b> Cf. John 7:30 regarding the attempt to seize Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n43007122"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “servants.” The “chief priests and Pharisees” is a comprehensive term for the groups represented in the ruling council (the Sanhedrin) as in John 7:45; 18:3; Acts 5:22, 26. As “servants” or “officers” of the Sanhedrin, their representatives should be distinguished from the Levites serving as temple police (perhaps John 7:30 and 44; also John 8:20; 10:39; 19:6; Acts 4:3). Even when performing ‘police’ duties such as here, their “officers” are doing so only as part of their general tasks (See K. H. Rengstorf, <i>TDNT</i> 8:540).</p></p>
<p id="n43007123"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “came.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007124"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007124">124</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 1:24.</p></p>
<p id="n43007125"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Why did you not bring him?” The words “back with you” are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n43007126"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered them.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007127"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> Questions prefaced with <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) in Greek anticipate a negative answer. This can sometimes be indicated by using a “tag” at the end in English (here the tag is “have you?”).</p></p>
<p id="n43007128"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the rulers,” used here to describe members of the Sanhedrin.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>chief priests and Pharisees</i> (John 7:45) is a comprehensive term for the groups represented in the ruling council (the Sanhedrin) as in John 7:45; 18:3; Acts 5:22, 26. Likewise the term <i>member of the ruling council</i> here denotes a member of the Sanhedrin, the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews. Note the same Greek word (“ruler”) is used to describe Nicodemus in John 3:1, and Nicodemus also speaks up in this episode (John 7:50).</p></p>
<p id="n43007129"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> Questions prefaced with <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) in Greek anticipate a negative answer. This can sometimes be indicated by using a “tag” at the end in English (here the tag is “have they?”).</p></p>
<p id="n43007130"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “crowd.” “Rabble” is a good translation here because the remark by the Pharisees is so derogatory.</p></p>
<p id="n43007131"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n43007132"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who was one of them”; the referent (the rulers) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n43007133"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007134"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “judge.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007135"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knows.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007136"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> Questions prefaced with <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) in Greek anticipate a negative answer. This can sometimes be indicated by using a “tag” at the end in English (here the tag is “does it?”).</p></p>
<p id="n43007137"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They answered and said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n43007138"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> Questions prefaced with <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) in Greek anticipate a negative answer. This can sometimes be indicated by using a “tag” at the end in English (here the tag is “are you?”).</p></p>
<p id="n43007139"><a href="file1047.xhtml#n43007139">139</a> <p><b>tc</b> At least one early and significant <span class="smcaps">ms</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66*</sup>) places the article before “prophet” (<span class="greek">ὁ προφήτης</span>, <span class="translit">ho prophētēs</span>), making this a reference to the “prophet like Moses” mentioned in Deut 18:15.</p><p><b>tn</b> This claim by the leaders presents some difficulty, because Jonah had been from Gath Hepher, in Galilee (2 Kgs 14:25). Also the Babylonian Talmud later stated, “There was not a tribe in Israel from which there did not come prophets” (<i>b</i>. <i>Sukkah</i> 27b). Two explanations are possible: (1) In the heat of anger the members of the Sanhedrin overlooked the facts (this is perhaps the easiest explanation). (2) This anarthrous noun is to be understood as a reference to <i>the</i> prophet of Deut 18:15 (note the reading of <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66</sup> which is articular), by this time an eschatological figure in popular belief. This would produce in the text of John’s Gospel a high sense of irony indeed, since the religious authorities by their insistence that “the Prophet” could not come from Galilee displayed their true ignorance of where Jesus came from on <i>two</i> levels at once (Bethlehem, his birthplace, the fulfillment of Mic 5:2, but also heaven, from which he was sent by the Father). The author does not even bother to refute the false attestation of Jesus’ place of birth as Galilee (presumably Christians knew all too well where Jesus came from).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
