<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 19</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 19</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Questions About Divorce</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:1</span> Now when<sup><a id="n400191" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n400191">1</a></sup> Jesus finished these sayings, he left Galilee and went to the region of Judea beyond the Jordan River.<sup><a id="n400192" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n400192">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">19:2</span> Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:3</span> Then some Pharisees<sup><a id="n400193" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n400193">3</a></sup> came to him in order to test him. They asked, “Is it lawful<sup><a id="n400194" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n400194">4</a></sup> to divorce a wife for any cause?”<sup><a id="n400195" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n400195">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">19:4</span> He answered, “Have you not read that from the beginning the Creator <b><i>made</i></b> <b><i>them male and female</i></b>,<sup><a id="n400196" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n400196">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">19:5</span> and said, ‘<b><i>For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and will be united with his wife, and the two will become one flesh</i></b>’?<sup><a id="n400197" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n400197">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">19:6</span> So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.” <span class="verse">19:7</span> They said to him, “Why then did Moses command us <i>to give <b>a certificate of dismissal</b> and to divorce</i> her?”<sup><a id="n400198" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n400198">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">19:8</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n400199" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n400199">9</a></sup> said to them, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because of your hard hearts,<sup><a id="n4001910" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001910">10</a></sup> but from the beginning it was not this way. <span class="verse">19:9</span> Now I say to you that whoever divorces his wife, except for immorality, and marries another commits adultery.” <span class="verse">19:10</span> The<sup><a id="n4001911" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001911">11</a></sup> disciples said to him, “If this is the case of a husband with a wife, it is better not to marry!” <span class="verse">19:11</span> He<sup><a id="n4001912" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001912">12</a></sup> said to them, “Not everyone can accept this statement, except those to whom it has been given. <span class="verse">19:12</span> For there are some eunuchs who were that way from birth,<sup><a id="n4001913" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001913">13</a></sup> and some who were made eunuchs<sup><a id="n4001914" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001914">14</a></sup> by others,<sup><a id="n4001915" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001915">15</a></sup> and some who became eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who is able to accept this should accept it.”</p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus and Little Children </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:13</span> Then little children were brought to him for him to lay his hands on them and pray.<sup><a id="n4001916" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001916">16</a></sup> But the disciples scolded those who brought them.<sup><a id="n4001917" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001917">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">19:14</span> But Jesus said, “Let the little children come to me and do not try to stop them, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.”<sup><a id="n4001918" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001918">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">19:15</span> And he placed his hands on them and went on his way.<sup><a id="n4001919" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001919">19</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Rich Young Man </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:16</span> Now<sup><a id="n4001920" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001920">20</a></sup> someone came up to him and said, “Teacher, what good thing must I do to gain eternal life?”<sup><a id="n4001921" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001921">21</a></sup> <span class="verse">19:17</span> He said to him, “Why do you ask me about what is good? There is only one who is good. But if you want to enter into life, keep the commandments.” <span class="verse">19:18</span> “Which ones?” he asked. Jesus replied, “<b><i>Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not give false testimony,</i></b> <span class="verse">19:19</span> <b><i>honor</i></b> <b><i>your father and mother,</i></b><sup><a id="n4001922" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001922">22</a></sup> and <b><i>love your neighbor as yourself</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4001923" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001923">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">19:20</span> The young man said to him, “I have wholeheartedly obeyed<sup><a id="n4001924" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001924">24</a></sup> all these laws.<sup><a id="n4001925" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001925">25</a></sup> What do I still lack?” <span class="verse">19:21</span> Jesus said to him, “If you wish to be perfect, go sell your possessions and give the money<sup><a id="n4001926" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001926">26</a></sup> to the poor, and you will have treasure<sup><a id="n4001927" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001927">27</a></sup> in heaven. Then come, follow me.” <span class="verse">19:22</span> But when the young man heard this he went away sorrowful, for he was very rich.<sup><a id="n4001928" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001928">28</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">19:23</span> Then Jesus said to his disciples, “I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4001929" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001929">29</a></sup> it will be hard for a rich person to enter the kingdom of heaven! <span class="verse">19:24</span> Again I say,<sup><a id="n4001930" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001930">30</a></sup> it is easier for a camel<sup><a id="n4001931" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001931">31</a></sup> to go through the eye of a needle<sup><a id="n4001932" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001932">32</a></sup> than for a rich person to enter into the kingdom of God.” <span class="verse">19:25</span> The<sup><a id="n4001933" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001933">33</a></sup> disciples were greatly astonished when they heard this and said, “Then who can be saved?”<sup><a id="n4001934" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001934">34</a></sup> <span class="verse">19:26</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4001935" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001935">35</a></sup> looked at them and replied, “This is impossible for mere humans,<sup><a id="n4001936" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001936">36</a></sup> but for God all things are possible.” <span class="verse">19:27</span> Then Peter said<sup><a id="n4001937" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001937">37</a></sup> to him, “Look,<sup><a id="n4001938" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001938">38</a></sup> we have left everything to follow you!<sup><a id="n4001939" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001939">39</a></sup> What then will there be for us?” <span class="verse">19:28</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4001940" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001940">40</a></sup> said to them, “I tell you the truth:<sup><a id="n4001941" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001941">41</a></sup> In the age when all things are renewed,<sup><a id="n4001942" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001942">42</a></sup> when the Son of Man sits on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging<sup><a id="n4001943" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001943">43</a></sup> the twelve tribes of Israel. <span class="verse">19:29</span> And whoever has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or fields for my sake will receive a hundred times as much<sup><a id="n4001944" href="file988_notes.xhtml#n4001944">44</a></sup> and will inherit eternal life. <span class="verse">19:30</span> But many who are first will be last, and the last first. </p>

</body>
</html>