<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Corinthians 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Corinthians<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Living by Faith, Not by Sight</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> For we know that if our earthly house, the tent we live in,<sup><a id="n470051" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n470051">1</a></sup> is dismantled,<sup><a id="n470052" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n470052">2</a></sup> we have a building from God, a house not built by human hands, that is eternal in the heavens. <span class="verse">5:2</span> For in this earthly house<sup><a id="n470053" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n470053">3</a></sup> we groan, because we desire to put on<sup><a id="n470054" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n470054">4</a></sup> our heavenly dwelling, <span class="verse">5:3</span> if indeed, after we have put on<sup><a id="n470055" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n470055">5</a></sup> our heavenly house,<sup><a id="n470056" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n470056">6</a></sup> we will not be found naked. <span class="verse">5:4</span> For we groan while we are in this tent,<sup><a id="n470057" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n470057">7</a></sup> since we are weighed down,<sup><a id="n470058" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n470058">8</a></sup> because we do not want to be unclothed, but clothed, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. <span class="verse">5:5</span> Now the one who prepared us for this very purpose<sup><a id="n470059" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n470059">9</a></sup> is God, who gave us the Spirit as a down payment.<sup><a id="n4700510" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700510">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:6</span> Therefore we are always full of courage, and we know that as long as we are alive here on earth<sup><a id="n4700511" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700511">11</a></sup> we are absent from the Lord— <span class="verse">5:7</span> for we live<sup><a id="n4700512" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700512">12</a></sup> by faith, not by sight. <span class="verse">5:8</span> Thus we are full of courage and would prefer to be away<sup><a id="n4700513" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700513">13</a></sup> from the body and at home with the Lord. <span class="verse">5:9</span> So then whether we are alive<sup><a id="n4700514" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700514">14</a></sup> or away, we make it our ambition to please him.<sup><a id="n4700515" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700515">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:10</span> For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,<sup><a id="n4700516" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700516">16</a></sup> so that each one may be paid back according to what he has done while in the body, whether good or evil.<sup><a id="n4700517" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700517">17</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Message of Reconciliation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:11</span> Therefore, because we know the fear of the Lord,<sup><a id="n4700518" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700518">18</a></sup> we try to persuade<sup><a id="n4700519" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700519">19</a></sup> people,<sup><a id="n4700520" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700520">20</a></sup> but we are well known<sup><a id="n4700521" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700521">21</a></sup> to God, and I hope we are well known to your consciences too. <span class="verse">5:12</span> We are not trying to commend<sup><a id="n4700522" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700522">22</a></sup> ourselves to you again, but are giving you an opportunity to be proud of us,<sup><a id="n4700523" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700523">23</a></sup> so that you may be able to answer those who take pride<sup><a id="n4700524" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700524">24</a></sup> in outward appearance<sup><a id="n4700525" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700525">25</a></sup> and not in what is in the heart. <span class="verse">5:13</span> For if we are out of our minds, it is for God; if we are of sound mind, it is for you. <span class="verse">5:14</span> For the love of Christ<sup><a id="n4700526" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700526">26</a></sup> controls us, since we have concluded this, that Christ<sup><a id="n4700527" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700527">27</a></sup> died for all; therefore all have died. <span class="verse">5:15</span> And he died for all so that those who live should no longer live for themselves but for him who died for them and was raised.<sup><a id="n4700528" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700528">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:16</span> So then from now on we acknowledge<sup><a id="n4700529" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700529">29</a></sup> no one from an outward human point of view.<sup><a id="n4700530" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700530">30</a></sup> Even though we have known Christ from such a human point of view,<sup><a id="n4700531" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700531">31</a></sup> now we do not know him in that way any longer. <span class="verse">5:17</span> So then, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; what is old has passed away<sup><a id="n4700532" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700532">32</a></sup> —look, what is new<sup><a id="n4700533" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700533">33</a></sup> has come!<sup><a id="n4700534" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700534">34</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:18</span> And all these things are from God who reconciled us to himself through Christ, and who has given us the ministry of reconciliation. <span class="verse">5:19</span> In other words, in Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting people’s trespasses against them, and he has given us<sup><a id="n4700535" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700535">35</a></sup> the message of reconciliation. <span class="verse">5:20</span> Therefore we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God were making his plea<sup><a id="n4700536" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700536">36</a></sup> through us. We plead with you<sup><a id="n4700537" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700537">37</a></sup> on Christ’s behalf, “Be reconciled to God!” <span class="verse">5:21</span> God<sup><a id="n4700538" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700538">38</a></sup> made the one who did not know sin<sup><a id="n4700539" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700539">39</a></sup> to be sin for us, so that in him<sup><a id="n4700540" href="file1130_notes.xhtml#n4700540">40</a></sup> we would become the righteousness of God. </p>

</body>
</html>