<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 14</h2>
<p id="n660141"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n660141">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660142"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n660142">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “and here was” expresses the sense of <span class="greek">καὶ ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">kai idou</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n660143"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n660143">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a voice” (cf. Rev 1:15), but since in this context nothing is mentioned as the content of the voice, it is preferable to translate <span class="greek">φωνή</span> (<span class="translit">phōnē</span>) as “sound” here.</p></p>
<p id="n660144"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n660144">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the introduction of a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n660145"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n660145">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “elders, and no one.” This is a continuation of the previous sentence in the Greek text, but because of the length and complexity of the sentence a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n660146"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n660146">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The aorist passive verb is rendered as a reflexive (“defiled themselves”) by BDAG 657 s.v. <span class="greek">μολύνω</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n660147"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n660147">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in their mouth was not found a lie.”</p></p>
<p id="n660148"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n660148">8</a> <p><b>tc</b> Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>47</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> 1 1006 1611 2351 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup>) have the conjunction “for” (<span class="greek">γάρ</span>, <span class="translit">gar</span>) here so that the phrase reads: “<i>for</i> they are blameless.” Other significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A C P 1854 2053 <i>al</i> lat) lack the word. The shorter reading is to be preferred since the scribes were more likely to make the connection explicit through the addition of “for” than they would have been to omit the conjunction. As it is, the passage without the conjunction makes good sense and evokes a very somber tone.</p></p>
<p id="n660149"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n660149">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601410"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601410">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span>47 <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* <span class="apparatus">M</span> sa) lack <span class="greek">ἄλλον</span> (<span class="translit">allon</span>, “another”) here, but the support for it is stronger (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>115vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A C P 051 1006 1611 1841 2053 2329 <i>al</i> latt sy bo). The problem that its inclusion represents is that there is no reference to any other angel in the immediate context (the last mention was in 11:15). In this instance, the longer reading is harder. The word was probably intentionally omitted in order to resolve the tension; less likely, it might have been accidentally omitted since its spelling is similar to “angel” (<span class="greek">ἄγγελος</span>, <span class="translit">angelos</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6601411"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 1.10 states, “a point or region of the sky directly above the earth—‘high in the sky, midpoint in the sky, directly overhead, straight above in the sky.’”</p></p>
<p id="n6601412"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601413"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “an eternal gospel to announce as good news.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601414"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to those seated on the earth.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601415"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and tribe,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here or before the following term since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n6601416"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “people, saying.” In the Greek text this is a continuation of the previous sentence. For the translation of <span class="greek">λέγω</span> (<span class="translit">legō</span>) as “declare,” see BDAG 590 s.v. 2.e.</p></p>
<p id="n6601417"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601418"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601418">18</a> <p><b>tc</b> There are several different variants comprising a textual problem involving “second” (<span class="greek">δεύτερος</span>, <span class="translit">deuteros</span>). First, several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A 1 2329 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup>) read “another, a second angel” (<span class="greek">ἄλλος δεύτερος ἄγγελος</span>, <span class="translit">allos deuteros angelos</span>). Second, other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>47</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* 1006 1841 1854) read just “another, a second” (<span class="greek">ἄλλος δεύτερος</span>). Third, the reading “another angel” (<span class="greek">ἄλλος ἄγγελος</span>) is supported by a few Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span> and some versional evidence (69 ar vg). Fourth, several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> [C reads <span class="greek">δεύτερον</span> instead of <span class="greek">δεύτερος</span>] 051 1611 2053 2344 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup>) support the reading “another, a second angel” (<span class="greek">ἄλλος ἄγγελος δεύτερος</span>). The reading that most likely gave rise to the others is the fourth. The first reading attempts to smooth out the grammar by placing the adjective in front of the noun. The second reading may have dropped out the “angel” on the basis of its similarity to “another” (<span class="greek">ἄλλος</span>). The third reading either intentionally or accidentally left out the word “second.” In any event, this is weakly attested and should not be given much consideration. (If, however, this reading had had good support, with “second” floating, and with “third” in the text in 14:9, one could possibly see <span class="greek">δεύτερος</span> as a motivated reading. But without sufficient support for the third reading, the one thing that is most certain is that <span class="greek">δεύτερος</span> was part of the initial text here.) It is difficult to account for the rise of the other readings if “second” is not original. And the undisputed use of “third” (<span class="greek">τρίτος</span>, <span class="translit">tritos</span>) in 14:9 may be another indicator that the adjective “second” was in the autographic text. Finally, the fourth reading is the most difficult and therefore, in this case, to be accepted as the progenitor of the others.</p></p>
<p id="n6601419"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And another angel, a second.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601420"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the first” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6601421"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation of <span class="greek">λέγω</span> (<span class="translit">legō</span>) as “declare,” see BDAG 590 s.v. 2.e.</p></p>
<p id="n6601422"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601422">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> The fall of <i>Babylon the great city</i> is described in detail in Rev 18:2-24.</p></p>
<p id="n6601423"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “all the Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601424"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of the wine of the passion of the sexual immorality of her.” Here <span class="greek">τῆς πορνείας</span> (<span class="translit">tēs porneias</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive. In an ironic twist of fate, God will make Babylon drink her own mixture, but it will become the wine of his wrath in retribution for her immoral deeds (see the note on the word “wrath” in 16:19).</p></p>
<p id="n6601425"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601426"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And another angel, a third.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601427"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “followed them.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601428"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601428">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation of <span class="greek">λέγω</span> (<span class="translit">legō</span>) as “declare,” see BDAG 590 s.v. 2.e.</p></p>
<p id="n6601429"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601429">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he himself.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601430"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word for “anger” here is <span class="greek">θυμός</span> (<span class="translit">thumos</span>), a wordplay on the “passion” (<span class="greek">θυμός</span>) of the personified city of Babylon in 14:8.</p></p>
<p id="n6601431"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “brimstone.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601432"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601432">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek pronoun is plural here even though the verbs in the previous verse are singular.</p></p>
<p id="n6601433"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601433">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The present tense <span class="greek">ἀναβαίνει</span> (<span class="translit">anabainei</span>) has been translated as a futuristic present (<i>ExSyn</i> 535-36). This is also consistent with the future passive <span class="greek">βασανισθήσεται</span> (<span class="translit">basanisthēsetai</span>) in v. 10.</p></p>
<p id="n6601434"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601434">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The present tense <span class="greek">ἔχουσιν</span> (<span class="translit">echousin</span>) has been translated as a futuristic present to keep the English tense consistent with the previous verb (see note on “will go up” earlier in this verse).</p></p>
<p id="n6601435"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601435">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601436"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601436">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Here is.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601437"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601437">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the perseverance.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601438"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601438">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who keep.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601439"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601439">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “hold to” are implied as a repetition of the participle translated “keep” (<span class="greek">οἱ τηροῦντες</span>, <span class="translit">hoi tērountes</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6601440"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601440">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “faith of Jesus.” The construction may mean either “faith in Jesus” or “faithful to Jesus.” Either translation implies that <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsou</span>) is to be taken as an objective genitive; the difference is more lexical than grammatical because <span class="greek">πίστις</span> (<span class="translit">pistis</span>) can mean either “faith” or “faithfulness.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601441"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601441">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601442"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601442">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from their trouble” (L&amp;N 22.7).</p></p>
<p id="n6601443"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601443">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “their deeds will follow with them.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601444"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601444">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601445"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601445">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and behold, a white cloud.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601446"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601446">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> This phrase constitutes an allusion to Dan 7:13. Concerning <span class="greek">υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου</span> (<span class="translit">huios tou anthrōpou</span>), BDAG 1026 s.v. <span class="greek">υἱός</span> 2.d.<span class="greek">γ</span> says: “<span class="greek">ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου</span> lit. ‘the son of the man’…‘the human being, the human one, the man’…On Israelite thought contemporary w. Jesus and alleged knowledge of a heavenly being looked upon as a ‘Son of Man’ or ‘Man’, who exercises Messianic functions such as judging the world (metaph., pictorial passages in En 46-48; 4 Esdr 13:3, 51f)…Outside the gospels: Ac 7:56…Rv 1:13; 14:14 (both after Da 7:13…).” The term “son” here in this expression is anarthrous and as such lacks specificity. Some commentators and translations take the expression as an allusion to Daniel 7:13 and not to “the son of man” found in gospel traditions (e.g., Mark 8:31; 9:12; cf. D. E. Aune, <i>Revelation</i> [WBC], 2:800-801; cf. also NIV). Other commentators and versions, however, take the phrase “son of man” as <i>definite</i>, involving allusions to Dan 7:13 and “the son of man” gospel traditions (see G. K. Beale, <i>Revelation</i> [NIGTC], 771-72; NRSV).</p></p>
<p id="n6601447"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601447">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “like a son of man, having.” In the Greek text this is a continuation of the previous sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n6601448"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601448">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601449"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601449">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Send out.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601450"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601450">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> The aorist <span class="greek">θέρισον</span> (<span class="translit">therison</span>) has been translated ingressively.</p></p>
<p id="n6601451"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601451">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the angel’s directions.</p></p>
<p id="n6601452"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601452">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601453"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601453">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601454"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601454">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who had authority over.” This appears to be the angel who tended the fire on the altar.</p></p>
<p id="n6601455"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601455">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the one having the sharp sickle”; the referent (the angel in v. 17) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601456"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601456">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Send.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601457"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601457">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 1018 s.v. <span class="greek">τρυγάω</span> states: “‘gather in’ ripe fruit, esp. <i>harvest</i> (<i>grapes</i>) w. acc. of the fruit (POslo. 21, 13 [71 ad]; Jos., Ant. 4, 227) Lk 6:44; Rv 14:18 (in imagery, as in the foll. places)…W. acc. of that which bears the fruit <i>gather the fruit of</i> the vine…or the vineyard (s. <span class="greek">ἄμπελος</span> a) Rv 14:19.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601458"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601458">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 181 s.v. <span class="greek">βότρυς</span> states, “<i>bunch of grapes</i> Rv 14:18…The word is also found in the Phrygian Papias of Hierapolis, in a passage in which he speaks of the enormous size of the grapes in the new aeon (in the Lat. transl. in Irenaeus 5, 33, 2f.): dena millia botruum Papias (1:2). On this see Stephan. Byz. s.v. <span class="greek">Εὐκαρπία</span>: Metrophanes says that in the district of <span class="greek">Εὐκαρπία</span> in Phrygia Minor the grapes were said to be so large that one bunch of them caused a wagon to break down in the middle.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601459"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601459">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive <span class="greek">τῆς γῆς</span> (<span class="translit">tēs gēs</span>), taken symbolically, could be considered a genitive of apposition.</p></p>
<p id="n6601460"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601460">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “its bunches of grapes” (a different Greek word from the previous clause). L&amp;N 3.38 states, “the fruit of grapevines (see 3.27)—‘grape, bunch of grapes.’ <span class="greek">τρύγησον τοὺς βότρυας τῆς ἀμπέλου τῆς γῆς</span>,<span class="greek"> ὅτι ἤκμασαν αἱ σταφυλαὶ αὐτῆς</span> ‘cut the grapes from the vineyard of the earth because its grapes are ripe’ Re 14:18. Some scholars have contended that <span class="greek">βότρυς</span> means primarily a bunch of grapes, while <span class="greek">σταφυλή</span> designates individual grapes. In Re 14:18 this difference might seem plausible, but there is scarcely any evidence for such a distinction, since both words may signify grapes as well as bunches of grapes.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601461"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601461">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the use of <span class="greek">ἥκμασαν</span> (<span class="translit">ēkmasan</span>) BDAG 36 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀκμάζω</span> states, “<i>to bloom</i>…of grapes…Rv 14:18.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601462"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601462">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the angel’s directions.</p></p>
<p id="n6601463"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601463">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “vine.” BDAG 54 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄμπελος</span> a states, “<span class="greek">τρυγᾶν τοὺς βότρυας τῆς ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τῆς γῆς</span> <i>to harvest the grapes fr. the vine of the earth</i> (i.e., fr. the earth, symbol. repr. as a grapevine) Rv 14:18f; but <span class="greek">ἀ</span> may be taking on the meaning of <span class="greek">ἀμπελών</span>, as oft. in pap., possibly PHib. 70b, 2 [III bc].” The latter alternative has been followed in the translation (<span class="greek">ἀμπελών</span> = “vineyard”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601464"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601464">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the gender of <span class="greek">μέγαν</span> (<span class="translit">megan</span>, masc.) does not match the gender of <span class="greek">ληνόν</span> (<span class="translit">lēnon</span>, fem.) it has been taken to modify that word (as do most English translations).</p></p>
<p id="n6601465"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601465">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601466"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601466">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The winepress was stomped</i>. See Isa 63:3, where Messiah does this alone (usually several individuals would join in the process).</p></p>
<p id="n6601467"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601467">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 6.7 states, “In Re 14:20 the reference to a bit and bridle is merely an indication of measurement, that is to say, the height of the bit and bridle from the ground, and one may reinterpret this measurement as ‘about a meter and a half’ or ‘about five feet.’”</p></p>
<p id="n6601468"><a href="file1247.xhtml#n6601468">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “1,600 stades.” A stade was a measure of length about 607 ft (185 m). Thus the distance here would be 184 mi or 296 km.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
