<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 4</h2>
<p id="n450041"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n450041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “according to natural descent” (BDAG 916 s.v. <span class="greek">σάρξ</span> 4).</p></p>
<p id="n450042"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n450042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has found?”</p></p>
<p id="n450043"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n450043">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was justified.” </p></p>
<p id="n450044"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n450044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">λογίζομαι</span> (<span class="translit">logizomai</span>) occurs 11 times in this chapter (vv. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 22, 23, 24). In secular usage it could (a) refer to deliberations of some sort, or (b) in commercial dealings (as virtually a technical term) to “reckoning” or “charging up a debt.” See H. W. Heidland, <i>TDNT</i> 4:284, 290-92.</p></p>
<p id="n450045"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n450045">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 15:6. </p></p>
<p id="n450046"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n450046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not according to grace but according to obligation.”</p></p>
<p id="n450047"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n450047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who justifies the ungodly.” </p></p>
<p id="n450048"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n450048">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Happy.”</p></p>
<p id="n450049"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n450049">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word for “man” or “individual” here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which often means “male” or “man (as opposed to woman).” However, as BDAG 79 s.v. 2 says, here it is “equivalent to <span class="greek">τὶς</span> <i>someone, a person</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500410"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb translated “count” here is <span class="greek">λογίζομαι</span> (<span class="translit">logizomai</span>). It occurs eight times in Rom 4:1-12, including here, each time with the sense of “place on someone’s account.” By itself the word is neutral, but in particular contexts it can take on a positive or negative connotation. The other occurrences of the verb have been translated using a form of the English verb “credit” because they refer to a positive event: the application of righteousness to the individual believer. The use here in v. 8 is negative: the application of sin. A form of the verb “credit” was not used here because of the positive connotations associated with that English word, but it is important to recognize that the same concept is used here as in the other occurrences.</p></p>
<p id="n4500411"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500411">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 32:1-2.</p></p>
<p id="n4500412"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “happiness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500413"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “upon.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500414"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500414">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on “circumcision” in 2:25.</p></p>
<p id="n4500415"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “upon.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500416"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500416">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 15:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4500417"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of the faith, the one [existing] in uncircumcision.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500418"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that he might be,” giving the purpose of v. 11a.</p></p>
<p id="n4500419"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “through uncircumcision.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500420"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the father of circumcision.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500421"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ‘in-uncircumcision faith’ of our father Abraham.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500422"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500422">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> Although a singular noun, <i>the promise</i> is collective and does not refer only to Gen 12:7, but as D. Moo (<i>Romans 1-8</i> [WEC], 279) points out, refers to multiple aspects of the promise to Abraham: multiplied descendants (Gen 12:2), possession of the land (Gen 13:15-17), and his becoming the vehicle of blessing to all people (Gen 12:3).</p></p>
<p id="n4500423"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “rendered inoperative.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500424"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “violation.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500425"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that it might be according to grace.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500426"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those who are of the faith of Abraham.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500427"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Verses 16-17 comprise one sentence in Greek, but this has been divided into two sentences due to English requirements.</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 17:5. The quotation forms a parenthesis in Paul’s argument.</p></p>
<p id="n4500428"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500428">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “He is our father” are not in the Greek text but are supplied to show that they resume Paul’s argument from 16b. (It is also possible to supply “Abraham had faith” here [so REB], taking the relative clause [“who is the father of us all”] as part of the parenthesis, and making the connection back to “the faith of Abraham,” but such an option is not as likely [C. E. B. Cranfield, <i>Romans</i> [ICC], 1:243].)</p></p>
<p id="n4500429"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500429">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> “The God” is not in the Greek text but is supplied for clarity. </p></p>
<p id="n4500430"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “calls into existence the things that do not exist.” The translation of <span class="greek">ὡς ὄντα</span> (<span class="translit">hōs onta</span>) allows for two different interpretations. If it has the force of result, then <i>creatio ex nihilo</i> (“creation out of nothing,” a technical theological phrase) is in view and the variant rendering is to be accepted (so C. E. B. Cranfield, <i>Romans</i> [ICC], 1:244). A problem with this view is the scarcity of <span class="greek">ὡς</span> plus participle to indicate result (though for the telic idea with <span class="greek">ὡς</span> plus participle, cf. Rom 15:15; 1 Thess 2:4). If it has a comparative force, then the translation given in the text is to be accepted: “this interpretation fits the <i>immediate</i> context better than a reference to God’s creative power, for it explains the assurance with which God can speak of the ‘many nations’ that will be descended from Abraham” (D. Moo, <i>Romans</i> [NICNT], 282; so also W. Sanday and A. C. Headlam, <i>Romans</i> [ICC], 113). Further, this view is in line with a Pauline idiom, viz., verb followed by <span class="greek">ὡς</span> plus participle (of the same verb or, in certain contexts, its antonym) to compare present reality with what is not a present reality (cf. 1 Cor 4:7; 5:3; 7:29, 30 (three times), 31; Col 2:20 [similarly, 2 Cor 6:9, 10]).</p></p>
<p id="n4500431"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Abraham) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4500432"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500432">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who against hope believed,” referring to Abraham. The relative pronoun was converted to a personal pronoun and, because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4500433"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500433">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 17:5.</p></p>
<p id="n4500434"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500434">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to that which had been spoken.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500435"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500435">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 15:5.</p></p>
<p id="n4500436"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500436">36</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it) read “he did not consider” by including the negative particle (<span class="greek">οὐ</span>, <span class="translit">ou</span>), but others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C 6 81 365 1506 1739 co) lack <span class="greek">οὐ</span>. The reading which includes the negative particle probably represents a scribal attempt to exalt the faith of Abraham by making it appear that his faith was so strong that he did not even consider the physical facts. But “here Paul does not wish to imply that faith means closing one’s eyes to reality, but that Abraham was so strong in faith as to be undaunted by every consideration” (<i>TCGNT</i> 451). Both on external and internal grounds, the reading without the negative particle is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4500437"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500437">37</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> bo) have <span class="greek">ἤδη</span> (<span class="translit">ēdē</span>, “already”) at this point in v. 19. But B F G 630 1739 1881 lat sa lack it. Since it appears to heighten the style of the narrative and since there is no easy accounting for an accidental omission, it is best to regard the shorter text as autographic. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating doubt as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4500438"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500438">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4500439"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500439">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and being.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4500440"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500440">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4500441"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500441">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Abraham) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4500442"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500442">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> A quotation from Gen 15:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4500443"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500443">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (Abraham) has been specified in the translation for clarity. </p></p>
<p id="n4500444"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500444">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who,” referring to Jesus. The relative pronoun was converted to a personal pronoun and, because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4500445"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500445">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “handed over.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The verb translated <i>given over</i> (<span class="greek">παραδίδωμι</span>, <span class="translit">paradidōmi</span>) is also used in Rom 1:24, 26, 28 to describe <i>God</i> giving people over to sin. But it is also used frequently in the gospels to describe Jesus being handed over (or delivered up, betrayed) by sinful men for crucifixion (cf., e.g., Matt 26:21; 27:4; Mark 9:31; 10:33; 15:15; Luke 20:20; 22:24; 24:7). It is probable that Paul has both ideas in mind: Jesus was handed over by sinners, but even this betrayal was directed by the Father for our sake (<i>because of our transgressions</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n4500446"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500446">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because of.” However, in light of the unsatisfactory sense that a causal nuance would here suggest, it has been argued that the second <span class="greek">διά</span> (<span class="translit">dia</span>) is prospective rather than retrospective (D. Moo, <i>Romans</i> [NICNT], 288-89). The difficulty of this interpretation is the structural balance that both <span class="greek">διά</span> phrases provide (“given over because of our transgressions…raised because of our justification”). However the poetic structure of this verse strengthens the likelihood that the clauses each have a different force.</p></p>
<p id="n4500447"><a href="file1095.xhtml#n4500447">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> Many scholars regard Rom 4:25 to be poetic or hymnic. These terms are used broadly to refer to the genre of writing, not to the content. There are two broad criteria for determining if a passage is poetic or hymnic: “(a) <i>stylistic:</i> a certain rhythmical lilt when the passages are read aloud, the presence of <i>parallelismus membrorum</i> (i.e., an arrangement into couplets), the semblance of some metre, and the presence of rhetorical devices such as alliteration, <i>chiasmus</i>, and antithesis; and (b) <i>linguistic:</i> an unusual vocabulary, particularly the presence of theological terms, which is different from the surrounding context” (P. T. O’Brien, <i>Philippians</i> [NIGTC], 188-89). Classifying a passage as hymnic or poetic is important because understanding this genre can provide keys to interpretation. However, not all scholars agree that the above criteria are present in this passage.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
