<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n550041"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n550041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the word.”</p></p>
<p id="n550042"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n550042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “be persistent.”</p></p>
<p id="n550043"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n550043">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in season, out of season.”</p></p>
<p id="n550044"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n550044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “encourage.”</p></p>
<p id="n550045"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n550045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the people in that future time) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n550046"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n550046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in accord with.”</p></p>
<p id="n550047"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n550047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having an itching in regard to hearing,” “having itching ears.”</p></p>
<p id="n550048"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n550048">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> These <i>myths</i> were legendary tales characteristic of the false teachers in Ephesus and Crete. See parallels in 1 Tim 1:4; 4:7; and Titus 1:14.</p></p>
<p id="n550049"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n550049">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sober,” “temperate.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500410"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of my departure.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500411"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500411">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>I have competed well</i> (<i>Grk</i> “I have competed the good competition”) uses words that may refer to a race or to a boxing or wrestling match: “run the good race” or “fight the good fight.” The similar phrase in 1 Tim 1:18 uses a military picture and is more literally “war the good warfare.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500412"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all who have loved.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500413"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500413">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Demas</i> is most likely the same individual mentioned in Col 4:14 and Phlm 24.</p></p>
<p id="n5500414"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having loved.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500416"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “useful.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500417"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in serving me.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500419"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “showed me much evil.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500420"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500420">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 28:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5500421"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “against whom,” as a continuation of the previous clause. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5500422"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the preaching.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500423"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “might be completely fulfilled.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500424"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “save me.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500425"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to whom.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5500426"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “unto the ages of the ages,” an emphatic way of speaking about eternity in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n5500427"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “greet.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500428"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500428">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>Prisca and Aquila</i> see also Acts 18:2, 18, 26; Rom 16:3-4; 1 Cor 16:19. In the NT “Priscilla” and “Prisca” are the same person. Paul uses the name <i>Prisca,</i> while the author of Acts uses the diminutive form of the name Priscilla.</p></p>
<p id="n5500430"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” or “fellow Christians” as here (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited). </p></p>
<p id="n5500431"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500431">31</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading <span class="greek">ὁ κύριος</span> (<span class="translit">ho kurios</span>, “the Lord”) is well supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* F G 33 1739 1881 sa, but predictable expansions on the text have occurred at this point: A 104 614 read <span class="greek">ὁ κύριος ᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (<span class="translit">ho kurios Iēsous</span>, “the Lord Jesus”), while <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> C D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> sy bo have <span class="greek">ὁ κύριος ᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστός</span> (<span class="translit">ho kurios Iēsous Christos</span>, “the Lord Jesus Christ”). As B. M. Metzger notes, although in a late book such as 2 Timothy, one might expect the fuller title for the Lord, accidental omission of <i>nomina sacra</i> is rare (<i>TCGNT</i> 582). The shorter reading is thus preferred on both external and internal grounds.</p></p>
<p id="n5500432"><a href="file1184.xhtml#n5500432">32</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> lat sy) conclude this letter with <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”). Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Further, there are several excellent Alexandrian and Western representatives (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A C F G 6 33 81 1739* 1881 sa) that lack the particle, rendering the omission the preferred reading. </p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
