<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 14</h2>
<p id="n420141"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n420141">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that one.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic. </p></p>
<p id="n420142"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n420142">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to eat bread,” an idiom for participating in a meal.</p></p>
<p id="n420143"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n420143">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a ruler of the Pharisees.” He was probably a synagogue official.</p></p>
<p id="n420144"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n420144">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n420145"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n420145">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Watching…closely</i> is a graphic term meaning to lurk and watch; see Luke 11:53-54.</p></p>
<p id="n420146"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n420146">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And there.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n420147"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n420147">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1). Here it has been translated as “right” in the phrase “right in front of him,” giving a similar effect of vividness in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n420148"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n420148">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> This condition called edema or dropsy involves swollen limbs resulting from the accumulation of fluid in the body’s tissues, especially the legs.</p></p>
<p id="n420149"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n420149">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the sequence of events (Jesus’ question was prompted by the man’s appearance). </p></p>
<p id="n4201410"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus, answering, said.” This is redundant in contemporary English. In addition, since the context does not describe a previous question to Jesus (although one may well be implied), the phrase has been translated here as “Jesus asked.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201411"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, experts in the interpretation of the Mosaic law (traditionally, “lawyers”).</p></p>
<p id="n4201412"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201412">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath or not?</i>” Will the Pharisees and experts in religious law defend tradition and speak out against doing good on the Sabbath? Has anything at all been learned since Luke 13:10-17? Has repentance come (13:6-9)?</p></p>
<p id="n4201413"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the sequence of events (Jesus’ healing the man was in response to their refusal to answer). </p></p>
<p id="n4201414"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201415"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “taking hold [of the man].” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιλαβόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">epilabomenos</span>) has been taken as indicating attendant circumstance.</p></p>
<p id="n4201416"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and let him go.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201417"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201418"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201418">18</a> <p><b>tc</b> Here “son,” found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45,75</sup> (A) B W <span class="apparatus">M</span>, is the preferred reading. The other reading, “donkey” (found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> K L <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 579 892 1241 2542 <i>al</i> lat bo), looks like an assimilation to Luke 13:15 and Deut 22:4; Isa 32:20, and was perhaps motivated by an attempt to soften the unusual collocation of “son” and “ox.” The Western ms D differs from all others and reads “sheep.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201419"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated here as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context. The experts, who should be expected to know the law, are unable to respond to Jesus’ question.</p></p>
<p id="n4201420"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201420">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They could not reply</i>. Twice in the scene, the experts remain <i>silent</i> (see v. 4). That, along with the presence of power working through Jesus, serves to indicate endorsement of his work and message.</p></p>
<p id="n4201421"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201422"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201423"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those who were invited.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201424"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the best places.” The “places of honor” at the meal would be those closest to the host.</p></p>
<p id="n4201425"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “banquet.” This may not refer only to a wedding feast, because this term can have broader sense (note the usage in Esth 2:18; 9:22 LXX). However, this difference does not affect the point of the parable.</p></p>
<p id="n4201426"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do not recline in the place of honor.” 1st century middle eastern meals were not eaten while sitting at a table, but while reclining on one’s side on the floor with the head closest to the low table and the feet farthest away.</p></p>
<p id="n4201427"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by him”; the referent (the host) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201428"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201428">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “host, and.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate this action is a result of the situation described in the previous verse. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201429"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201429">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “then in disgrace”; <i>Grk</i> “with shame.” In this culture avoiding shame was important.</p></p>
<p id="n4201430"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “lowest place” (also in the repetition of the phrase in the next verse).</p></p>
<p id="n4201431"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one who invited you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201432"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201432">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Go up higher.” This means to move to a more important place.</p></p>
<p id="n4201433"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201433">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context, which involves the reversal of expected roles.</p></p>
<p id="n4201434"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201434">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of the statement <i>the one who humbles himself will be exalted</i> is humility and the reversal imagery used to underline it is common: Luke 1:52-53; 6:21; 10:15; 18:14.</p></p>
<p id="n4201435"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201435">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201436"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201436">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, the leader of the Pharisees (v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4201437"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201437">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> The meaning of the two terms for meals here, <span class="greek">ἄριστον</span> (<span class="translit">ariston</span>) and <span class="greek">δεῖπνον</span> (<span class="translit">deipnon</span>), essentially overlap (L&amp;N 23.22). Translators usually try to find two terms for a meal to use as equivalents (e.g., lunch and dinner, dinner and supper, etc.). In this translation “dinner” and “banquet” have been used, since the expected presence of rich neighbors later in the verse suggests a rather more elaborate occasion than an ordinary meal.</p></p>
<p id="n4201438"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201438">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term, <span class="greek">δοχή</span> (<span class="translit">dochē</span>), is a third term for a meal (see v. 12) that could also be translated “banquet, feast.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201439"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201439">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> Normally the term means <i>crippled</i> as a result of being maimed or mutilated (L&amp;N 23.177).</p></p>
<p id="n4201440"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201440">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here “and” has been supplied between the last two elements in the series in keeping with English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201441"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201441">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> This list of needy is like Luke 7:22. See Deut 14:28-29; 16:11-14; 26:11-13.</p></p>
<p id="n4201442"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201442">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate that this follows from the preceding action. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201443"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201443">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>You will be blessed</i>. God notes and approves of such generosity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201444"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201444">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> The passive verb <i>will be repaid</i> looks at God’s commendation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201445"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201445">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201446"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201446">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> The reference to “Jesus” has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201447"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201447">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whoever” (the indefinite relative pronoun). This has been translated as “everyone who” to conform to contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201448"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201448">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will dine”; <i>Grk</i> “eat bread.” This refers to those who enjoy the endless fellowship of God’s coming rule.</p></p>
<p id="n4201449"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201449">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n4201450"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201450">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201451"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201451">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dinner.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201452"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201452">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> Presumably those <i>invited</i> would have sent a reply with the invitation stating their desire to attend, much like a modern R.S.V.P. Then they waited for the servant to announce the beginning of the celebration (D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> [BECNT], 2:1272).</p></p>
<p id="n4201453"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201453">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “guests” is not in the Greek text but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4201454"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201454">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And at.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201455"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201455">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dinner.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201456"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201456">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 7:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4201457"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201457">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “all unanimously” (BDAG 107 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπό</span> 6). “One after another” is suggested by L&amp;N 61.2.</p></p>
<p id="n4201458"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201458">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> To <i>make excuses</i> and cancel at this point was an insult in the culture of the time. Regardless of customs concerning responses to invitations, refusal at this point was rude.</p></p>
<p id="n4201459"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201459">59</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I have bought a field</i>. An examination of newly bought land was a common practice. It was this person’s priority.</p></p>
<p id="n4201460"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201460">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>Please excuse me</i> is probably a polite way of refusing, given the dynamics of the situation, although it is important to note that an initial acceptance had probably been indicated and it was now a bit late for a refusal. The semantic equivalent of the phrase may well be “please accept my apologies.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201461"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201461">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And another.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201462"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201462">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Five yoke of oxen</i>. This was a wealthy man, because the normal farmer had one or two yoke of oxen.</p></p>
<p id="n4201463"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201463">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “going out” for <span class="greek">πορεύομαι</span> (<span class="translit">poreuomai</span>) is used because “going” in this context could be understood to mean “I am about to” rather than the correct nuance, “I am on my way to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201464"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201464">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And another.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201465"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201465">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I just got married, and I cannot come</i>. There is no request to be excused here; just a refusal. Why this disqualifies attendance is not clear. The OT freed a newly married man from certain responsibilities such as serving in the army (Deut 20:7; 24:5), but that would hardly apply to a banquet. The invitation is not respected in any of the three cases.</p></p>
<p id="n4201466"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201466">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the result of the preceding responses. </p></p>
<p id="n4201467"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201467">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “being furious, said.” The participle <span class="greek">ὀργισθείς</span> (<span class="translit">orgistheis</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201468"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201468">68</a> <p><b>sn</b> It was necessary to <i>go out quickly</i> because the banquet was already prepared. All the food would spoil if not eaten immediately.</p></p>
<p id="n4201469"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201469">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “town.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201470"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201470">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The poor, the crippled, the blind and the lame</i>. Note how the list matches v. 13, illustrating that point. Note also how the party goes on; it is not postponed until a later date. Instead new guests are invited.</p></p>
<p id="n4201471"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201471">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and the crippled.” Normally crippled as a result of being maimed or mutilated (L&amp;N 23.177). <span class="greek">Καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here and before the following category (<i>Grk</i> “and the blind and the lame”) since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4201472"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201472">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the order of events within the parable.</p></p>
<p id="n4201473"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201473">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>And still there is room</i>. This comment suggests the celebration was quite a big one, picturing the openness of God’s grace.</p></p>
<p id="n4201474"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201474">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the master’s response to the slave’s report. </p></p>
<p id="n4201475"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201475">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the”; in context the article is used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n4201476"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201476">76</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Go out to the highways and country roads</i>. This suggests the inclusion of people outside the town, even beyond the needy (poor, crippled, blind, and lame) in the town, and so is an allusion to the inclusion of the Gentiles.</p></p>
<p id="n4201477"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201477">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">φραγμός</span> (<span class="translit">phragmos</span>) refers to a fence, wall, or hedge surrounding a vineyard (BDAG 1064 s.v. 1). “Highways” and “country roads” probably refer not to separate places, but to the situation outside the town where the rural roads run right alongside the hedges or fences surrounding the fields (cf. J. A. Fitzmyer, <i>Luke</i> [AB], 1057).</p></p>
<p id="n4201478"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201478">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally “force” or “compel,” but according to BDAG 60 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναγκάζω</span> 2 this is a weakened nuance: “strongly urge/invite.” The meaning in this context is more like “persuade.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201479"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201479">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201480"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201480">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>So that my house will be filled</i>. God will bless many people.</p></p>
<p id="n4201481"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201481">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which frequently stresses males or husbands (in contrast to women or wives). However, the emphasis in the present context is on identifying these individuals as the ones previously invited, examples of which were given in vv. 18-20. Cf. also BDAG 79 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4201482"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201482">82</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>None of those individuals who were invited</i>. This is both the point and the warning. To be a part of the original invitation does not mean one automatically has access to blessing. One must respond when the summons comes in order to participate. The summons came in the person of Jesus and his proclamation of the kingdom. The statement here refers to the fact that many in Israel will not be blessed with participation, for they have ignored the summons when it came.</p></p>
<p id="n4201483"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201483">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dinner.” </p></p>
<p id="n4201484"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201484">84</a> <p><b>sn</b> It is important to note that the following remarks are not just to disciples, but to the <i>large crowds</i> who were following Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4201485"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201485">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201486"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201486">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> This figurative use operates on a relative scale. God is to be loved more than family or self.</p></p>
<p id="n4201487"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201487">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his own soul,” but <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) is frequently used of one’s physical life. It clearly has that meaning in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201488"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201488">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> It was customary practice in a Roman crucifixion for the prisoner to be made to <i>carry his own cross</i>. Jesus is speaking figuratively here in the context of rejection. If the priority is not one’s allegiance to Jesus, then one will not follow him in the face of possible rejection; see Luke 9:23.</p></p>
<p id="n4201489"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201489">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and come after.” In combination with the verb <span class="greek">ἔρχομαι</span> (<span class="translit">erchomai</span>) the improper preposition <span class="greek">ὀπίσω</span> (<span class="translit">opisō</span>) means “follow.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201490"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201490">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">καθίσας</span> (<span class="translit">kathisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201491"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201491">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> The first illustration involves checking to see if enough funds exist to build a watchtower. Both <span class="greek">ψηφίζω</span> (<span class="translit">psēphizō</span>, “compute”) and <span class="greek">δαπάνη</span> (<span class="translit">dapanē</span>, “cost”) are economic terms.</p></p>
<p id="n4201492"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201492">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to complete it, lest.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation and <span class="greek">ἵνα μήποτε</span> (<span class="translit">hina mēpote</span>, “lest”) has been translated as “Otherwise.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201493"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201493">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">θέντος</span> (<span class="translit">thentos</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4201494"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201494">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the tower” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201495"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201495">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “it” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201496"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201496">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “mock,” “ridicule.” The person who did not plan ahead becomes an object of joking and ridicule.</p></p>
<p id="n4201497"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201497">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “make fun of him, saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201498"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201498">98</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>this man</i> is often used in Luke in a derogatory sense; see “this one” and expressions like it in Luke 5:21; 7:39; 13:32; 23:4, 14, 22, 35.</p></p>
<p id="n4201499"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n4201499">99</a> <p><b>sn</b> The failure <i>to finish</i> the building project leads to embarrassment (in a culture where avoiding public shame was extremely important). The half completed tower testified to poor preparation and planning.</p></p>
<p id="n42014100"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">καθίσας</span> (<span class="translit">kathisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42014101"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the meaning of this verb see also L&amp;N 55.3, “to meet in battle, to face in battle.”</p></p>
<p id="n42014102"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And if not.” Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated; “succeed” is implied and has been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42014103"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a messenger.”</p></p>
<p id="n42014104"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014104">104</a> <p><b>sn</b> This image is slightly different from the former one about the tower (vv. 28-30). The first part of the illustration (<i>sit down first and determine</i>) deals with preparation. The second part of the illustration (<i>ask for terms of peace</i>) has to do with recognizing who is stronger. This could well suggest thinking about what refusing the “stronger one” (God) might mean, and thus constitutes a warning. Achieving peace with God, the more powerful king, is the point of the illustration.</p></p>
<p id="n42014105"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Likewise therefore every one of you who does not renounce all his own possessions cannot be my disciple.” The complex double negation is potentially confusing to the modern reader and has been simplified in the translation. See L&amp;N 57.70.</p><p><b>sn</b> The application of the saying is this: Discipleship requires that God be in first place. The reference to renunciation of <i>all his own possessions</i> refers to all earthly attachments that have first place.</p></p>
<p id="n42014106"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now salt…”; here <span class="greek">οὖν</span> has not been translated.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Salt</i> was used as seasoning or fertilizer (BDAG 41 s.v. <span class="greek">ἅλας</span> a), or as a preservative. If salt ceased to be useful, it was thrown away. With this illustration Jesus warned about a disciple who ceased to follow him.</p></p>
<p id="n42014107"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> The difficulty of this saying is understanding how <i>salt</i> could lose <i>its flavor</i> since its chemical properties cannot change. It is thus often assumed that Jesus was referring to chemically impure salt, perhaps a natural salt which, when exposed to the elements, had all the genuine salt leached out, leaving only the sediment or impurities behind. Others have suggested the background of the saying is the use of salt blocks by Arab bakers to line the floor of their ovens: Under the intense heat these blocks would eventually crystallize and undergo a change in chemical composition, finally being thrown out as unserviceable. A saying in the Talmud (<i>b. Bekhorot</i> 8b) attributed to R. Joshua ben Chananja (ca. <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 90), recounts how when he was asked the question “When salt loses its flavor, how can it be made salty again?” is said to have replied, “By salting it with the afterbirth of a mule.” He was then asked, “Then does the mule (being sterile) bear young?” to which he replied: “Can salt lose its flavor?” The point appears to be, both are impossible. The saying, while admittedly late, suggests that culturally the loss of flavor by salt was regarded as an impossibility. Genuine salt can never lose its flavor. In this case the saying by Jesus here may be similar to Matt 19:24, where it is likewise impossible for the camel to go through the eye of a sewing needle.</p></p>
<p id="n42014108"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “It is not useful” (L&amp;N 65.32).</p></p>
<p id="n42014109"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they throw it out.” The third person plural with unspecified subject is a circumlocution for the passive here.</p></p>
<p id="n42014110"><a href="file1029.xhtml#n42014110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “had better listen!” captures the force of the third person imperative more effectively than the traditional “let him hear,” which sounds more like a permissive than an imperative to the modern English reader. This was Jesus’ common expression to listen and heed carefully (cf. Matt 11:15; 13:9, 43; Mark 4:9, 23; Luke 8:8).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
