<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 21</h2>
<p id="n660211"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n660211">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660212"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n660212">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation of <span class="greek">ἀπέρχομαι</span> (<span class="translit">aperchomai</span>; here <span class="greek">ἀπῆλθαν</span> [<span class="translit">apēlthan</span>]) L&amp;N 13.93 has “to go out of existence—‘to cease to exist, to pass away, to cease.’”</p></p>
<p id="n660213"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n660213">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dwelling place”; traditionally, “tabernacle”; literally “tent.” </p></p>
<p id="n660214"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n660214">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “people”; <i>Grk</i> “men” (<span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span>, <span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>), a generic use of the term. In the translation “human beings” was used here because “people” occurs later in the verse and translates a different Greek word (<span class="greek">λαοί</span>, <span class="translit">laoi</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n660215"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n660215">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men, and he.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n660216"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n660216">6</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup>) do not add the words “[as] their God” (<span class="greek">αὐτῶν θεός</span>, <span class="translit">autōn theos</span>) after “he will be with them.” The <span class="smcaps">mss</span> with these words include A 2030 2050 2329 <i>al</i>. The Andreas group (<span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup>) also has the words, but in a different arrangement with the preceding (<span class="greek">ἔσται μετ᾿ αὐτῶν θεὸς αὐτῶν</span>, <span class="translit">estai met</span>’<span class="translit"> autōn theos autōn</span>). Not only do the words float, but scribes may have been motivated to make a connection here more directly with Isa 7:14; 8:8; Jer 24:7; 31:33; Zech 8:8. In light of sufficient external evidence as well as the possibility that the longer reading is theologically motivated, the shorter reading is preferred. NA<sup>28</sup> places the words in brackets, indicating doubts as to their authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n660217"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n660217">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God, and he.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n660218"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n660218">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation of <span class="greek">ἀπέρχομαι</span> (<span class="translit">aperchomai</span>; here <span class="greek">ἀπῆλθαν</span> [<span class="translit">apēlthan</span>]) L&amp;N 13.93 has “to go out of existence—‘to cease to exist, to pass away, to cease.’”</p></p>
<p id="n660219"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n660219">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6602110"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “it down” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6602111"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “faithful.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602112"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “It has happened.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602113"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “water” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6602114"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “as a free gift” (see L&amp;N 57.85).</p></p>
<p id="n6602115"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who is victorious”; traditionally, “who overcomes.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602116"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">φαρμακεία</span> (<span class="translit">pharmakeia</span>, “magic spells”) see L&amp;N 53.100: “the use of magic, often involving drugs and the casting of spells upon people—‘to practice magic, to cast spells upon, to engage in sorcery, magic, sorcery.’ <span class="greek">φαρμακεία</span>: <span class="greek">ἐν τῇ φαρμακείᾳ σου ἐπλανήθησαν πάντα τὰ ἔθνη</span> ‘with your magic spells you deceived all the peoples (of the world)’ Re 18:23.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602117"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “idolaters.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602118"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “their share.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602119"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “brimstone.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602120"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sulfur, which is.” The relative pronoun has been translated as “that” to indicate its connection to the previous clause. The nearest logical antecedent is “the lake [that burns with fire and sulfur],” although “lake” (<span class="greek">λίμνη</span>, <span class="translit">limnē</span>) is feminine gender, while the pronoun “which” (<span class="greek">ὅ</span>, <span class="translit">ho</span>) is neuter gender. This means that (1) the proper antecedent could be “their place” (<i>Grk</i> “their share,”) agreeing with the relative pronoun in number and gender, or (2) the neuter pronoun still has as its antecedent the feminine noun “lake,” since agreement in gender between pronoun and antecedent was not always maintained, with an explanatory phrase occurring with a neuter pronoun regardless of the case of the antecedent. In favor of the latter explanation is Rev 20:14, where the phrase “the lake of fire” is in apposition to the phrase “the second death.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602121"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6602122"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with me.” The translation “with me” implies that John was engaged in a dialogue with the one speaking to him (e.g., Jesus or an angel) when in reality it was a one-sided conversation, with John doing all the listening. For this reason, <span class="greek">μετ᾿ ἐμοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">met</span>’<span class="translit"> emou</span>, “with me”) was translated as “to me.” See also v. 15.</p></p>
<p id="n6602123"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the angel’s invitation.</p></p>
<p id="n6602124"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the spirit.” “Spirit” could refer either to the Holy Spirit or the human spirit, but in either case John was in “a state of spiritual exaltation best described as a trance” (R. H. Mounce, <i>Revelation</i> [NICNT], 75).</p></p>
<p id="n6602125"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to a mountain great and high.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602126"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from God, having the glory of God.” Here a new sentence was started in the translation by supplying the words “the city” to refer back to the previous clause and translating the participle (“having”) as a finite verb.</p></p>
<p id="n6602127"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">ἰάσπιδι</span> (<span class="translit">iaspidi</span>) BDAG 465 s.v. <span class="greek">ἴασπις</span> states, “<i>jasper,</i> a precious stone found in various colors, mostly reddish, somet. green…brown, blue, yellow, and white. In antiquity the name was not limited to the variety of quartz now called jasper, but could designate any opaque precious stone. Rv 21:18f. W. <span class="greek">λίθος</span> 4:3 (TestSol C 11:8). <span class="greek">λίθος ἴασπις κρυσταλλίζων</span> <i>a stone of crystal-clear jasper</i> 21:11 (cp. Is 54:12); perh. the opal is meant here; acc. to some, the diamond.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602128"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “jasper, having.” Here a new sentence was started in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6602129"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a (city) wall great and high.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602130"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 897 s.v. <span class="greek">πυλών</span> 1 states, “<i>gate</i>, esp. of the large, impressive gateways at the entrance of temples and palaces…of the entrances of the heavenly Jerusalem…<span class="greek">οἱ πυλῶνες αὐτῆς οὐ μὴ κλεισθῶσιν</span> <i>its entrances shall never be shut</i> Rv 21:25; cp. vss. 12ab, 13abcd, 15, 21ab; 22:14.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602131"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of the sons of Israel.” The translation “nation of Israel” is given in L&amp;N 11.58.</p></p>
<p id="n6602132"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on them”; the referent (the gates) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6602133"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “There are” have been supplied to make a complete English sentence. This is a continuation of the previous sentence, a lengthy and complicated one in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n6602134"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “side” has been supplied four times in this verse for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6602135"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6602136"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one”; the referent (the angel of v. 9) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6602137"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the somewhat parenthetical nature of the description of the city.</p></p>
<p id="n6602138"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the city lies square.” On <span class="greek">κεῖμαι</span> (<span class="translit">keimai</span>) in this context, BDAG 537 s.v. 2 states, “<i>lie,</i> of things…<span class="greek">ἡ πόλις τετράγωνος κεῖται</span> <i>is laid out as a square</i> Rv 21:16.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602139"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602139">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6602140"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with the rod”; the word “measuring” is supplied from the description in v. 15.</p></p>
<p id="n6602141"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “2,200 kilometers,” <i>Grk</i> “12,000 stades.” A stade was a measure of length about 607 ft (185 m).</p></p>
<p id="n6602142"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the measurement was kept in cubits in the translation because of the possible symbolic significance of the number 144 (12 times 12). This is about 216 ft (65 m).</p></p>
<p id="n6602143"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here L&amp;N 81.1 translate the phrase <span class="greek">μέτρον ἀνθρώπου</span>,<span class="greek"> ὅ ἐστιν ἀγγέλου</span> (<span class="translit">metron anthrōpou, ho estin angelou</span>) “‘the unit of measurement used by a person, that is, by an angel’ Re 21:17.” It is more likely that <span class="greek">μέτρον</span> is an accusative of respect or reference.</p></p>
<p id="n6602144"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and its wall”; the referent of the pronoun (the city) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6602145"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase <span class="greek">ἡ ἐνδώμησις τοῦ τείχους</span> (<span class="translit">hē endōmēsis tou teichous</span>) is difficult to translate precisely. BDAG 334 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐνδώμησις</span> states, “primary mng. ‘interior structure’; in our lit. prob.=<i>construction,</i> hence <i>material</i> <span class="greek">τοῦ τείχους</span> Rv 21:18.” The phrase could then be translated, “the foundation of the city wall was jasper” or “the material used for the wall of the city was jasper.” The latter alternative has been used in the translation because the text goes on to discuss the foundation in 21:19 (using the term <span class="greek">θεμέλιος</span> [<span class="translit">themelios</span>]), which is somewhat redundant if the foundation is mentioned here.</p></p>
<p id="n6602146"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “transparent crystal.” See L&amp;N 6.222, which notes the emphasis is on transparency here. The same Greek word, <span class="greek">καθαρός</span> (<span class="translit">katharos</span>), means both “pure” (referring to the gold) and “transparent” (referring to the glass).</p></p>
<p id="n6602147"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The perfect participle here has been translated as an intensive (resultative) perfect.</p></p>
<p id="n6602148"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602148">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Agate</i> (also called chalcedony) is a semiprecious stone usually milky or gray in color (L&amp;N 2.32).</p></p>
<p id="n6602149"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602149">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Onyx</i> (also called sardonyx) is a semiprecious stone that comes in various colors (L&amp;N 2.35).</p></p>
<p id="n6602150"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602150">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Carnelian</i> is a semiprecious gemstone, usually red in color (L&amp;N 2.36).</p></p>
<p id="n6602151"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602151">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Chrysolite</i> refers to either quartz or topaz, golden yellow in color (L&amp;N 2.37).</p></p>
<p id="n6602152"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602152">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Beryl</i> is a semiprecious stone, usually blue-green or green in color (L&amp;N 2.38).</p></p>
<p id="n6602153"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602153">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Chrysoprase</i> is a greenish type of quartz (L&amp;N 2.40).</p></p>
<p id="n6602154"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602154">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Jacinth</i> is a semiprecious stone, probably blue in color (also called “hyacinth,” but that translation is not used here because of possible confusion with the flower of the same name). See L&amp;N 2.41.</p></p>
<p id="n6602155"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602155">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6602156"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602156">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">πλατεῖα</span> (<span class="translit">plateia</span>) refers to a major (broad) street (L&amp;N 1.103).</p></p>
<p id="n6602157"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602157">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic. Every verse from here to the end of this chapter begins with <span class="greek">καί</span> in Greek, but due to differences between Greek and contemporary English style, these have not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n6602158"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602158">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this word BDAG 755 s.v. <span class="greek">παντοκράτωρ</span> states, “the <i>Almighty, All-Powerful, Omnipotent</i> (<i>One</i>) only of God…(<span class="greek">ὁ</span>)<span class="greek"> κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ π</span>.…Rv 1:8; 4:8; 11:17; 15:3; 16:7; 21:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602159"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602159">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n6602160"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602160">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “splendor”; <i>Grk</i> “glory.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602161"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602161">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the translation “during the day” see BDAG 436 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡμέρα</span> 1.a, “But also, as in Thu. et al., of time within which someth. occurs, <span class="greek">ἡμέρας</span> <i>during the day</i> Rv 21:25.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602162"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602162">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek connective <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) most often expresses some sort of causal connection. However, in this context there is no causal force to the second phrase; <span class="greek">γάρ</span> simply expresses continuation or connection. Because of this it has been translated as “and.” See BDAG 189-90 s.v. 2.</p></p>
<p id="n6602163"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602163">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> The clause has virtually the force of a parenthetical comment.</p></p>
<p id="n6602164"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602164">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “honor,” but BDAG 1005 s.v. <span class="greek">τιμή</span> 2.b states, “An outstanding feature of the use of <span class="greek">τ</span>., as already shown in several passages, is its combination w. <span class="greek">δόξα</span>…of earthly possessions <span class="greek">τὴν δόξαν καὶ τὴν τιμὴν τῶν ἐθνῶν</span> Rv 21:26 (<span class="greek">τιμή</span> concr.=an object of value: Ezk 22:25).”</p></p>
<p id="n6602165"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602165">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n6602166"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602166">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6602167"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602167">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here BDAG 552 s.v. <span class="greek">κοινός</span> 2 states, “pert. to being of little value because of being common, <i>common, ordinary, profane</i>…b. specifically, of that which is ceremonially impure: Rv 21:27.” </p></p>
<p id="n6602168"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602168">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “what is abhorrent”; <i>Grk</i> “who practices abominations.”</p></p>
<p id="n6602169"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602169">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “practicing abomination or falsehood.” Because of the way <span class="greek">βδέλυγμα</span> (<span class="translit">bdelugma</span>) has been translated (“does what is detestable”) it was necessary to repeat the idea from the participle <span class="greek">ποιῶν</span> (<span class="translit">poiōn</span>, “practices”) before the term “falsehood.” On this term, BDAG 1097 s.v. <span class="greek">ψεῦδος</span> states, “<span class="greek">ποιεῖν ψεῦδος</span> <i>practice (the things that go with) falsehood</i> Rv 21:27; 22:15.” Cf. Rev 3:9.</p></p>
<p id="n6602170"><a href="file1254.xhtml#n6602170">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those who are written”; the word “names” is implied.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
