<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Thessalonians 1</h2>
<p id="n520011"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n520011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul.” The word “from” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n520013"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n520013">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of witnesses, including several early and significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A [D] I 33 1175 1241 1505 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> bo), have <span class="greek">ἀπὸ θεοῦ πατρὸς ἡμῶν καὶ κυριοῦ Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">apo theou patros hēmōn kai kuriou Iēsou Christou</span>, “from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ”) at the end of v. 1. The more abrupt reading (“Grace and peace to you”) without this addition is supported by B F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 629 1739 1881 lat sa. Apart from a desire to omit the redundancy of the mention of God and Christ in this verse, there is no good reason why scribes would have omitted the characteristically Pauline greeting. (Further, if this were the case, why did these same scribes overlook such an opportunity in 2 Thess 1:1-2?) On the other hand, since 1 Thessalonians is one of Paul’s earliest letters, what would become characteristic of his greetings seems to have been still in embryonic form (e.g., he does not yet call his audience “saints” [which will first be used in his address to the Corinthians], nor does he use <span class="greek">ἐν</span> (<span class="translit">en</span>) plus the dative to refer to the location of the church). Thus, the internal evidence is overwhelming in support of the shorter reading, for scribes would have been strongly motivated to rework this salutation in light of Paul’s style elsewhere. And the external evidence, though not overwhelming, is supportive of this shorter reading, found as it is in some of the best witnesses of the Alexandrian and Western groups.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Grace to you and peace.” </p></p>
<p id="n520014"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n520014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “mention you in our prayers, because we recall constantly…”</p></p>
<p id="n520015"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n520015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “making mention…recalling.” The participle <span class="greek">ποιούμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">poioumenoi</span>) in v. 2 has been translated as temporal, and <span class="greek">μνημονεύοντες</span> (<span class="translit">mnēmoneuontes</span>) in v. 3 has been translated as causal.</p></p>
<p id="n520016"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n520016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or the phrase may connect at the end of the verse: “hope…in the presence of our God and Father.”</p></p>
<p id="n520017"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n520017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> These phrases denote Christian virtues in action: the work produced by faith, labor motivated by love, and endurance that stems from hope in Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n520018"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n520018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the participle <span class="greek">εἰδότες</span> (<span class="translit">eidotes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb and a new sentence started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n520019"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n520019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” or “fellow Christians” as here (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited).</p></p>
<p id="n5200110"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “your election.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200111"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200112"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “speech,” or “an act of speaking.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200113"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “just as you know what sort of people we were among you for your sakes.” Verse 5 reflects on the experience of Paul and his fellow preachers; v. 6 begins to describe the Thessalonians’ response.</p></p>
<p id="n5200114"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “after you received.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200115"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200115">15</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D<sup>2</sup> F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 1175 1241 1505 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i>) have the plural <span class="greek">τύπους</span> (<span class="translit">tupous</span>, “examples”) here, while a few significant witnesses have the singular <span class="greek">τύπον</span> (<span class="translit">tupon</span>, “example”; B D*<sup>,c</sup> 6 33 81 104 1739 1881 lat). With <span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">humas</span>, “you”) immediately preceding, the plural form looks motivated: Scribes would be expected to change the singular to the plural here. Although the external evidence for the singular reading is not overwhelming, the internal evidence for it is compelling. </p></p>
<p id="n5200116"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the word of the Lord.”</p><p><b>sn</b> “The word of the Lord” is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; Luke 22:61, Acts 11:16, 1 Pet 1:25) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; here and in Acts 8:25; 13:44, 48, 49; 15:35, 36; 16:32; 19:10, 20; 1 Thess 4:15; 2 Thess 3:1). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said. Here the phrase has been translated “the message of the Lord” because of the focus upon the spread of the gospel evident in the passage.</p></p>
<p id="n5200117"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “your faith in God has gone out.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200118"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they themselves,” referring to people in the places just mentioned.</p></p>
<p id="n5200119"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “what sort of entrance we had to you” (an idiom for how someone is received).</p></p>
<p id="n5200120"><a href="file1164.xhtml#n5200120">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The coming wrath</i>. This <i>wrath</i> is an important theme in 1 Thess 5.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
