<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Thessalonians 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Thessalonians<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Ministry in Thessalonica</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> For you yourselves know, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n520021" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n520021">1</a></sup> about our coming to you—it has not proven to be purposeless.<sup><a id="n520022" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n520022">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:2</span> But although we suffered earlier and were mistreated in Philippi, as you know, we had the courage in our God to declare to you the gospel of God<sup><a id="n520024" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n520024">4</a></sup> in spite of much opposition. <span class="verse">2:3</span> For the appeal we make<sup><a id="n520025" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n520025">5</a></sup> does not come<sup><a id="n520026" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n520026">6</a></sup> from error or impurity or with deceit, <span class="verse">2:4</span> but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel, so we declare it, not to please people but God, who examines our hearts. <span class="verse">2:5</span> For we never appeared<sup><a id="n520027" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n520027">7</a></sup> with flattering speech, as you know, nor with a pretext for greed—God is our witness— <span class="verse">2:6</span> nor to seek glory from people, either from you or from others, <span class="verse">2:7</span> <sup><a id="n520028" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n520028">8</a></sup> although we could have imposed our weight as apostles of Christ; instead we became<sup><a id="n520029" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n520029">9</a></sup> little children<sup><a id="n5200210" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200210">10</a></sup> among you. Like a nursing mother caring for her own children, <span class="verse">2:8</span> with such affection for you<sup><a id="n5200211" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200211">11</a></sup> we were happy<sup><a id="n5200212" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200212">12</a></sup> to share with you not only the gospel of God but also our own lives, because you had become dear to us. <span class="verse">2:9</span> For you recall, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5200213" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200213">13</a></sup> our toil and drudgery: By working night and day so as not to impose a burden on any of you, we preached to you the gospel of God. <span class="verse">2:10</span> You are witnesses, and so is God, as to how holy and righteous and blameless our conduct was toward you who believe. <span class="verse">2:11</span> As you know, we treated each one of you as a father treats his own children, <span class="verse">2:12</span> exhorting and encouraging you and insisting that you live in a way worthy of God who calls you to his own kingdom and his glory. <span class="verse">2:13</span> And so<sup><a id="n5200214" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200214">14</a></sup> we too constantly thank God that when you received God’s message that you heard from us,<sup><a id="n5200215" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200215">15</a></sup> you accepted it not as a human message,<sup><a id="n5200216" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200216">16</a></sup> but as it truly is, God’s message, which is at work among you who believe. <span class="verse">2:14</span> For you became imitators, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5200217" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200217">17</a></sup> of God’s churches in Christ Jesus that are in Judea, because you too suffered the same things from your own countrymen as they in fact did from the Jews, <span class="verse">2:15</span> who killed both the Lord Jesus and the prophets<sup><a id="n5200218" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200218">18</a></sup> and persecuted us severely.<sup><a id="n5200219" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200219">19</a></sup> They are displeasing to God and are opposed to all people, <span class="verse">2:16</span> because they hinder us from speaking to the Gentiles so that they may be saved. Thus they constantly fill up their measure of sins,<sup><a id="n5200220" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200220">20</a></sup> but wrath<sup><a id="n5200221" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200221">21</a></sup> has come upon them completely.<sup><a id="n5200222" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200222">22</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Forced Absence from Thessalonica</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:17</span> But when we were separated from you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5200223" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200223">23</a></sup> for a short time (in presence, not in affection)<sup><a id="n5200224" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200224">24</a></sup> we became all the more fervent in our great desire<sup><a id="n5200225" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200225">25</a></sup> to see you in person.<sup><a id="n5200226" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200226">26</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:18</span> For we wanted to come to you (I, Paul, in fact tried again and again)<sup><a id="n5200227" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200227">27</a></sup> but Satan thwarted us. <span class="verse">2:19</span> For who is our hope or joy or crown to boast of<sup><a id="n5200228" href="file1165_notes.xhtml#n5200228">28</a></sup> before our Lord Jesus at his coming? Is it not of course you? <span class="verse">2:20</span> For you are our glory and joy! </p>

</body>
</html>