<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Pure-hearted Giving</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> “Be<sup><a id="n400061" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n400061">1</a></sup> careful not to display your righteousness merely to be seen by people.<sup><a id="n400062" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n400062">2</a></sup> Otherwise you have no reward with your Father in heaven. <span class="verse">6:2</span> Thus whenever you do charitable giving,<sup><a id="n400063" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n400063">3</a></sup> do not blow a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in synagogues<sup><a id="n400064" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n400064">4</a></sup> and on streets so that people will praise them. I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n400065" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n400065">5</a></sup> they have their reward! <span class="verse">6:3</span> But when you do your giving, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing, <span class="verse">6:4</span> so that your gift may be in secret. And your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you.<sup><a id="n400066" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n400066">6</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Private Prayer</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:5</span> “Whenever you pray, do not be like the hypocrites, because they love to pray while standing in synagogues<sup><a id="n400067" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n400067">7</a></sup> and on street corners so that people can see them. Truly I say to you, they have their reward! <span class="verse">6:6</span> But whenever you pray, go into your inner room,<sup><a id="n400068" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n400068">8</a></sup> close the door, and pray to your Father in secret. And your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you.<sup><a id="n400069" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n400069">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:7</span> When<sup><a id="n4000610" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000610">10</a></sup> you pray, do not babble repetitiously like the Gentiles, because they think that by their many words they will be heard. <span class="verse">6:8</span> Do<sup><a id="n4000611" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000611">11</a></sup> not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask him. <span class="verse">6:9</span> So pray this way:<sup><a id="n4000612" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000612">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">Our Father<sup><a id="n4000613" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000613">13</a></sup> in heaven, may your name be honored,<sup><a id="n4000614" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000614">14</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:10</span> may your kingdom come,<sup><a id="n4000615" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000615">15</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">may your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.</p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:11</span> Give us today our daily bread,<sup><a id="n4000616" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000616">16</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:12</span> and forgive us our debts,<sup><a id="n4000617" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000617">17</a></sup> as we ourselves<sup><a id="n4000618" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000618">18</a></sup> have forgiven our debtors. </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">6:13</span> And do not lead us into temptation,<sup><a id="n4000619" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000619">19</a></sup> but deliver us from the evil one.<sup><a id="n4000620" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000620">20</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:14</span> “For if you forgive others<sup><a id="n4000621" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000621">21</a></sup> their sins, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. <span class="verse">6:15</span> But if you do not forgive others, your Father will not forgive you your sins. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Proper Fasting</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:16</span> “When<sup><a id="n4000622" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000622">22</a></sup> you fast, do not look sullen like the hypocrites, for they make their faces unattractive<sup><a id="n4000623" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000623">23</a></sup> so that people will see them fasting. I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4000624" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000624">24</a></sup> they have their reward! <span class="verse">6:17</span> When<sup><a id="n4000625" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000625">25</a></sup> you fast, anoint your head<sup><a id="n4000626" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000626">26</a></sup> and wash your face, <span class="verse">6:18</span> so that it will not be obvious to others when you are fasting, but only to your Father who is in secret. And your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Lasting Treasure</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:19</span> “Do not accumulate for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth<sup><a id="n4000627" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000627">27</a></sup> and devouring insect<sup><a id="n4000628" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000628">28</a></sup> destroy and where thieves break in and steal. <span class="verse">6:20</span> But accumulate for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moth and devouring insect do not destroy, and thieves do not break in and steal. <span class="verse">6:21</span> For where your<sup><a id="n4000629" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000629">29</a></sup> treasure<sup><a id="n4000630" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000630">30</a></sup> is, there your heart will be also. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:22</span> “The eye is the lamp of the body. If then your eye is healthy,<sup><a id="n4000631" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000631">31</a></sup> your whole body will be full of light. <span class="verse">6:23</span> But if your eye is diseased,<sup><a id="n4000632" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000632">32</a></sup> your whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light in you is darkness, how great is the darkness! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:24</span> “No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate<sup><a id="n4000633" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000633">33</a></sup> the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise<sup><a id="n4000634" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000634">34</a></sup> the other. You cannot serve God and money.<sup><a id="n4000635" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000635">35</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Do Not Worry </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:25</span> “Therefore I tell you, do not worry<sup><a id="n4000636" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000636">36</a></sup> about your life, what you will eat or drink, or about your body, what you will wear. Isn’t there more to life than food and more to the body than clothing? <span class="verse">6:26</span> Look at the birds in the sky:<sup><a id="n4000637" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000637">37</a></sup> They do not sow, or reap, or gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds<sup><a id="n4000638" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000638">38</a></sup> them. Aren’t you more valuable<sup><a id="n4000639" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000639">39</a></sup> than they are? <span class="verse">6:27</span> And which of you by worrying can add even one hour to his life?<sup><a id="n4000640" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000640">40</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:28</span> Why do you worry about clothing? Think about how the flowers<sup><a id="n4000641" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000641">41</a></sup> of the field grow; they do not work<sup><a id="n4000642" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000642">42</a></sup> or spin. <span class="verse">6:29</span> Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his glory was clothed like one of these! <span class="verse">6:30</span> And if this is how God clothes the wild grass,<sup><a id="n4000643" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000643">43</a></sup> which is here today and tomorrow is tossed into the fire to heat the oven,<sup><a id="n4000644" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000644">44</a></sup> won’t he clothe you even more,<sup><a id="n4000645" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000645">45</a></sup> you people of little faith? <span class="verse">6:31</span> So then, don’t worry saying, ‘What will we eat?’ or ‘What will we drink?’ or ‘What will we wear?’ <span class="verse">6:32</span> For the unconverted<sup><a id="n4000646" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000646">46</a></sup> pursue these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them. <span class="verse">6:33</span> But above all pursue his kingdom<sup><a id="n4000647" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000647">47</a></sup> and righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well. <span class="verse">6:34</span> So then, do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Today has enough trouble of its own.<sup><a id="n4000648" href="file975_notes.xhtml#n4000648">48</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>