<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Thessalonians 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Thessalonians<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul<sup><a id="n520011" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n520011">1</a></sup> and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace and peace to you!<sup><a id="n520013" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n520013">3</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Thanksgiving for Response to the Gospel</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:2</span> We thank God always for all of you as we mention you constantly<sup><a id="n520014" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n520014">4</a></sup> in our prayers, <span class="verse">1:3</span> because we recall<sup><a id="n520015" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n520015">5</a></sup> in the presence of our God and Father<sup><a id="n520016" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n520016">6</a></sup> your work of faith and labor of love and endurance of hope<sup><a id="n520017" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n520017">7</a></sup> in our Lord Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">1:4</span> We know,<sup><a id="n520018" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n520018">8</a></sup> brothers and sisters<sup><a id="n520019" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n520019">9</a></sup> loved by God, that he has chosen you,<sup><a id="n5200110" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200110">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:5</span> in that<sup><a id="n5200111" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200111">11</a></sup> our gospel did not come to you merely in words,<sup><a id="n5200112" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200112">12</a></sup> but in power and in the Holy Spirit and with deep conviction (surely you recall the character we displayed when we came among you to help you).<sup><a id="n5200113" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200113">13</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:6</span> And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, when you received<sup><a id="n5200114" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200114">14</a></sup> the message with joy that comes from the Holy Spirit, despite great affliction. <span class="verse">1:7</span> As a result you became an example<sup><a id="n5200115" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200115">15</a></sup> to all the believers in Macedonia and in Achaia. <span class="verse">1:8</span> For from you the message of the Lord<sup><a id="n5200116" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200116">16</a></sup> has echoed forth not just in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place reports of your faith in God have spread,<sup><a id="n5200117" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200117">17</a></sup> so that we do not need to say anything. <span class="verse">1:9</span> For people everywhere<sup><a id="n5200118" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200118">18</a></sup> report how you welcomed us<sup><a id="n5200119" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200119">19</a></sup> and how you turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God <span class="verse">1:10</span> and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, Jesus our deliverer from the coming wrath.<sup><a id="n5200120" href="file1164_notes.xhtml#n5200120">20</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>