<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Ephesians 1</h2>
<p id="n490011"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n490011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul.” The word “from” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n490012"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n490012">2</a> <p><b>tc</b> The earliest and most important <span class="smcaps">mss</span> omit “in Ephesus” (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B* 6 1739 [Mcion<sup>T,E</sup>]), yet the opening line of this epistle makes little sense without the phrase (“to the saints who are and are faithful…”? or perhaps “to the saints who are also faithful,” though with this sense the <span class="greek">οὖσιν</span> [<span class="translit">ousin</span>] is redundant and the <span class="greek">καί</span> [<span class="translit">kai</span>] is treated somewhat unnaturally). What is interesting is Marcion’s canon list which speaks of the letter to the <i>Laodiceans</i> among Paul’s authentic epistles. This, coupled with some internal evidence that the writer did not know his audience personally (cf. 1:15; 3:2; absence of personal names throughout), suggests that Ephesians was an encyclical letter, intended for more than one audience. Does this mean that the shorter reading is to be preferred? Yes and no. A plausible scenario is as follows, assuming Pauline authorship (though this is strongly contested today; for arguments on behalf of Pauline authorship, see M. Barth, <i>Ephesians</i> [AB 34], 1:36-50; P. T. O’Brien, <i>Ephesians</i>, 4-47; and H. W. Hoehner, <i>Ephesians</i>, 2-61): Paul sent the letter from Rome, intending it first to go to Ephesus. At the same time, Colossians was dispatched. Going counterclockwise through Asia Minor, this letter would first come to Ephesus, the port of entry, then to Laodicea, then Colossae. Tychicus’ instructions may well have been for each church to “fill in the blank” on the address line. The church at Ephesus would have certainly made the most copies, being Paul’s home base for nearly three years. Hence, most of the surviving copies have “in Ephesus” in v. 1 (so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A B<sup>2</sup> D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 33 1175 1241 1505 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy co). But one might expect a hint of evidence that Laodicea also made a few copies: Both Marcion’s list and Col 4:16 may well imply this. What is to account for the early Alexandrian evidence, then? These <span class="smcaps">mss</span> were perhaps made from a very early copy, one reflecting the blank line before each church filled it in. Although it is of course only speculation (as is necessary in a historical investigation lacking some of the pieces to the puzzle), this scenario accounts for all of the data: (1) “in Ephesus” in most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>; (2) Laodicea in Marcion’s list and Col 4:16; (3) the lack of an addressee in the earliest witnesses; (4) why the earliest witnesses’ reading must be rejected as <i>too</i> hard; and (5) why the author seems not to know the readership. In sum, is “in Ephesus” original? Yes and no. <i>Some</i> address belongs there; <span class="greek">ἐν ᾿Εφέσῳ</span> (<span class="translit">en Ephesō</span>) is the predominant address, but several other churches also received this circular letter as their own. For this reason the phrase has been placed in single brackets in the translation. NA<sup>28</sup> also lists the words in brackets, indicating doubt as to their authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n490013"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n490013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and faithful.” The construction in Greek (as well as Paul’s style [and even if this letter is not by Paul it follows the general style of Paul’s letters, with some modifications]) suggests that the saints are identical to the faithful; hence, the <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) is best left untranslated. See M. Barth, <i>Ephesians</i> (AB 34), 1:68 and <i>ExSyn</i> 282.</p></p>
<p id="n490014"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n490014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Grace to you and peace.”</p></p>
<p id="n490015"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n490015">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> Eph 1:3-14 comprises one long sentence in Greek, with three major sections. Each section ends with a note of praise for God (vv. 6, 12, 14), focusing on a different member of the Trinity. After an opening summary of all the saints’ spiritual blessings (v. 3), the first section (vv. 4-6) offers up praise that the Father has chosen us in eternity past; the second section (vv. 7-12) offers up praise that the Son has redeemed us in the historical past (i.e., at the cross); the third section (vv. 13-14) offers up praise that the Holy Spirit has sealed us in our personal past, at the point of conversion.</p></p>
<p id="n490016"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n490016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is no verb in the Greek text; either the optative (“be”) or the indicative (“is”) can be supplied. The meaning of the term <span class="greek">εὐλογητός</span> (<span class="translit">eulogētos</span>), the author’s intention at this point in the epistle, and the literary genre of this material must all come into play to determine which is the preferred nuance. As an adjective <span class="greek">εὐλογητός</span> can mean either that one is praised or that one is blessed, that is, in a place of favor and benefit. The meaning “blessed” would be more naturally paired with an indicative verb here and would suggest that blessedness is an intrinsic part of God’s character. The meaning “praised” would be more naturally paired with an optative verb here and would suggest that God ought to be praised. Pauline style in the epistles generally moves from statements to obligations, expressing the reality first and then the believer’s necessary response, which would favor the indicative. However, many scholars regard Eph 1:3-14 as a <i>berakah</i> psalm (cf. A. T. Lincoln, <i>Ephesians</i> [WBC], 10-11). Rooted in the OT and Jewish worship, <i>berakah</i> psalms were songs of praise in which the worshiper gave praise to God; this would favor the optative (although not all scholars are agreed on this genre classification here; see H. W. Hoehner, <i>Ephesians</i>, 153-59, for discussion and an alternate conclusion). When considered as a whole, although a decision is difficult, the indicative seems to fit all the factors better. The author seems to be pointing to who God is and what he has done for believers in this section; the indicative more naturally fits that emphasis. Cf. also 2 Cor 1:3; 1 Pet 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n490017"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n490017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “enriched,” “conferred blessing.”</p></p>
<p id="n490018"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n490018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “just as.” Eph 1:3-14 are one long sentence in Greek that must be broken up in English translation. Verse 4 expresses the reason why God the Father is blessed (cf. BDAG 494 s.v. <span class="greek">καθώς</span> 3).</p></p>
<p id="n490019"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n490019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900110"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900110">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek word translated <i>blameless</i> (<span class="greek">ἀμώμους</span>, <span class="translit">amōmous</span>) is often translated “unblemished” when used of an acceptable sacrifice in the LXX. In the NT Christ our sacrifice is also said to be unblemished (Heb 9:14; 1 Pet 1:19). Since believers are in Christ, God views them positionally and will make them ultimately without blemish as well (Jude 24; Eph 5:27; Col 1:22).</p></p>
<p id="n4900111"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in his sight.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900112"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The prepositional phrase <span class="greek">ἐν ἀγάπῃ</span> (<span class="translit">en agapē</span>, “in love”) may modify one of three words or phrases: (1) “chose,” (2) “holy and unblemished,” both in v. 4, or (3) “by predestining” in v. 5. If it modifies “chose,” it refers to God’s motivation in that election, but this option is unlikely because of the placement of the prepositional phrase far away from the verb. The other two options are more likely. If it modifies “holy and unblemished,” it specifies that our holiness cannot be divorced from love. This view is in keeping with the author’s use of <span class="greek">ἀγάπη</span> to refer often to human love in Ephesians, but the placement of the prepositional phrase not immediately following the words it modifies would be slightly awkward. If it modifies “by predestining” (v. 5), again the motivation of God’s choice is love. This would fit the focus of the passage on God’s gracious actions toward believers. In Eph 3:17 the same prepositional phrase, <span class="greek">ἐν ἀγάπῃ</span> (<span class="translit">en agapē</span>, “in love”), occurs in the Greek text ahead of the participles it modifies, presumably for emphasis, and the same could be the case here.</p></p>
<p id="n4900113"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by predestining.” Verse 5 begins with an aorist participle dependent on the main verb in v. 4 (“chose”). </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>By predestining</i>. The aorist participle may be translated either causally (“because he predestined,” “having predestined”) or instrumentally (“by predestining”). A causal nuance would suggest that God’s predestination of certain individuals prompted his choice of them. An instrumental nuance would suggest that the means by which God’s choice was accomplished was by predestination. The instrumental view is somewhat more likely in light of normal Greek syntax (i.e., an aorist participle <i>following</i> an aorist main verb is more likely to be instrumental than causal).</p></p>
<p id="n4900114"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to himself” after “through Jesus Christ.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900115"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to adoption as sons.” The Greek term <span class="greek">υἱοθεσία</span> (<span class="translit">huiothesia</span>) was originally a legal technical term for adoption as a son with full rights of inheritance. BDAG 1024 s.v. notes, “a legal t.t. of ‘adoption’ of children, in our lit., i.e. in Paul, only in a transferred sense of a transcendent filial relationship between God and humans (with the legal aspect, not gender specificity, as major semantic component).” Although some modern translations remove the filial sense completely and render the term merely “adoption” (cf. NAB, ESV), the retention of this component of meaning was accomplished in the present translation by the phrase “as…legal heirs.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Adoption as his legal heirs</i> is different from spiritual birth as children. All true believers have been born as children of God and will be adopted as legal heirs of God. The adoption is both a future reality, and in some sense, already true. To be “adopted as a son” means to have the full rights of a legal heir. Thus, although in the ancient world, only boys could be adopted as legal heirs, in God’s family all children—both male and female—are adopted in this way.</p></p>
<p id="n4900116"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “good pleasure.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900117"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the praise of his glorious grace.” Many translations translate <span class="greek">δόξης τῆς χάριτος αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">doxēs tēs charitos autou</span>, literally “of the glory of his grace”) with <span class="greek">τῆς χάριτος</span> as an attributed genitive (cf., e.g., NIV, NRSV, ESV). The translation above has retained a literal rendering in order to make clear the relationship of this phrase to the other two similar phrases in v. 12 and 14, which affect the way one divides the material in the passage.</p></p>
<p id="n4900118"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the beloved.” The term <span class="greek">ἠγαπημένῳ</span> (<span class="translit">ēgapēmenō</span>) means “beloved,” but often bears connotations of “only beloved” in an exclusive sense. “His dearly loved Son” picks up this connotation.</p><p><b>sn</b> God’s grace can be poured out on believers only because of what Christ has done for them. Hence, he bestows his grace on us because we are <i><b>in</b> his dearly loved Son</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4900119"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in whom” (the relative clause of v. 7 is subordinate to v. 6). The “him” refers to Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n4900120"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900120">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> In this context <i>his blood</i>, the blood of Jesus Christ, refers to the price paid for believers’ redemption, which is the sacrificial death of Christ on the cross.</p></p>
<p id="n4900121"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sins,” focusing on a violation of moral standards.</p></p>
<p id="n4900122"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “He did this by revealing”; <i>Grk</i> “making known, revealing.” Verse 9 begins with a participle dependent on “lavished” in v. 8; the adverbial participle could be understood as temporal (“when he revealed”), which would be contemporaneous to the action of the finite verb “lavished,” or as means (“by revealing”). The participle has been translated here with the temporal nuance to allow for means to also be a possible interpretation. If the translation focused instead upon means, the temporal nuance would be lost as the time frame for the action of the participle would become indistinct.</p></p>
<p id="n4900123"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “secret.” In the NT <span class="greek">μυστήριον</span> (<span class="translit">mustērion</span>) refers to a divine secret previously undisclosed. </p></p>
<p id="n4900124"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “purposed,” “publicly displayed.” Cf. Rom 3:25.</p></p>
<p id="n4900125"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in him”; the referent (Christ) has been specified in the translation for the sake of clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>In Christ</i>. KJV has “in himself” as though the antecedent were God the Father. Although possible, the notion of the verb <i>set forth</i> (Greek <span class="greek">προτίθημι</span>, <span class="translit">protithēmi</span>) implies a plan that is carried out in history (cf. Rom 1:13; 3:25) and thus more likely refers to Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n4900126"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The precise meaning of the infinitive <span class="greek">ἀνακεφαλαιώσασθαι</span> (<span class="translit">anakephalaiōsasthai</span>) in v. 10 is difficult to determine since it was used relatively infrequently in Greek literature and only twice in the NT (here and Rom 13:9). While there have been several suggestions, three deserve mention: (1) “To sum up.” In Rom 13:9, using the same term, the author there says that the law may be “<i>summarized</i> in one command, to love your neighbor as yourself.” The idea then in Eph 1:10 would be that all things in heaven and on earth can be summed up and <i>made sense out of</i> in relation to Christ. (2) “To renew.” If this is the nuance of the verb then all things in heaven and earth, after their plunge into sin and ruin, are renewed by the coming of Christ and his redemption. (3) “To head up.” In this translation the idea is that Christ, in the fullness of the times, has been exalted so as to be appointed as the ruler (i.e., “head”) over all things in heaven and earth (including the church). That this is perhaps the best understanding of the verb is evidenced by the repeated theme of Christ’s exaltation and reign in Ephesians and by the connection to the <span class="greek">κεφαλή-</span> (<span class="translit">kephalē-</span>) language of 1:22 (cf. Schlier, <i>TDNT</i> 3:682; L&amp;N 63.8; M. Barth, <i>Ephesians</i> [AB 34], 1:89-92; <i>contra</i> A. T. Lincoln, <i>Ephesians</i> [WBC], 32-33).</p></p>
<p id="n4900127"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the heavens.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900128"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900128">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>And the things on earth</i>. Verse 10 ends with “in him.” The redundancy keeps the focus on Christ at the expense of good Greek style. Verse 11 repeats the reference with a relative pronoun (“in whom”)—again, at the expense of good Greek style. Although the syntax is awkward, the theology is rich. This is not the first time that a NT writer was so overcome with awe for his Lord that he seems to have lost control of his pen. Indeed, it happened frequently enough that some have labeled their christologically motivated solecisms an “apostolic disease.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900129"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in whom,” as a continuation of the previous verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4900130"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “we were appointed by lot.” The notion of the verb <span class="greek">κληρόω</span> (<span class="translit">klēroō</span>) in the OT was to “appoint a portion by lot” (the more frequent cognate verb <span class="greek">κληρονομέω</span> [<span class="translit">klēronomeō</span>] meant “obtain a portion, inherit”). In the passive, as here, the idea is that “we were appointed [as a portion] by lot” (BDAG 548 s.v. <span class="greek">κληρόω</span> 1). The words “God’s own” have been supplied in the translation to clarify this sense of the verb. An alternative interpretation is that believers receive a portion as an inheritance: “In Christ we too have been appointed a portion of the inheritance.” See H. W. Hoehner, <i>Ephesians</i>, 226-27, for discussion on this interpretive issue.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>God’s own possession</i>. Although God is not mentioned explicitly in the Greek text, it is clear from the context that he has chosen believers for himself. Just as with the nation Israel, the church is God’s chosen portion or possession (cf. Deut 32:8-9).</p></p>
<p id="n4900131"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who had already hoped.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900132"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900133"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in whom you also, when…” (continuing the sentence from v. 12).</p></p>
<p id="n4900134"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in whom also having believed.” The relative pronoun “whom” has been replaced in the translation with its antecedent (“Christ”) to improve the clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4900135"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you were sealed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900136"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Holy Spirit of promise.” Here <span class="greek">ἐπαγγελίας</span> (<span class="translit">epangelias</span>, “of promise”) has been translated as an attributive genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n4900137"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “first installment,” “pledge,” “deposit.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Down payment</i>. The Greek word <span class="greek">ἀρραβών</span> (<span class="translit">arrabōn</span>) denotes the first payment or first installment of money or goods which serves as a guarantee or pledge for the completion of the transaction. In the NT the term is used only figuratively of the Holy Spirit as the <i>down payment</i> of the blessings promised by God (it is used also in 2 Cor 1:22 and 5:5). In the “already—not yet” scheme of the NT the possession of the Spirit now by believers (“already”) can be viewed as a guarantee that God will give them the balance of the promised blessings in the future (“not yet”).</p></p>
<p id="n4900138"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “until the redemption of the possession.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900139"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900139">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> The conjunctive phrase <i>For this reason</i> points back to the preceding section, vv. 3-14, which is also summed up in this verse in the expression <i>because I have heard of your faith</i>. In other words, the author’s prayer can be made for his audience because he knows that they are true believers.</p></p>
<p id="n4900140"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “even I.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900141"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having also heard.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900142"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900142">42</a> <p><b>tc</b> <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B P 33 1739 1881 2464 Hier lack “your love” (<span class="greek">τὴν ἀγάπην</span>, <span class="translit">tēn agapēn</span>), while various other groups of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have different arrangements of the phrase “your love toward all the saints” (<span class="greek">τὴν ἀγάπην τὴν εἰς πάντας τοὺς ἁγίους</span>, <span class="translit">tēn agapēn tēn eis pantas tous hagious</span>). Most witnesses, especially the later ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sa), read <span class="greek">τὴν ἀγάπην τὴν εἰς πάντας τοὺς ἁγίους</span>. Externally, the shorter reading is superior. Internally, the omission of <span class="greek">τὴν ἀγάπην</span> is a significantly harder reading, for the saints become an object of faith on par with the Lord Jesus. If this reading is authentic, however, the force of <span class="greek">πίστις</span> (<span class="translit">pistis</span>) is probably closer to “faithfulness,” a meaning that could perhaps be suitable toward both the Lord and the saints. Nevertheless, if the shorter reading is authentic, later scribes would no doubt have been tempted to alter it. With the parallel in Col 1:4 at hand, <span class="greek">τὴν ἀγάπην</span> would have been the most obvious phrase to add. (Metzger <i>TCGNT</i> 533 suggests that <span class="greek">ἣν ἔχετε</span> would have been added instead of the second <span class="greek">τήν</span> if the shorter reading were original, in conformity with Col 1:4, but this is not necessarily so: Scribes often altered the text as minimally as possible, and since the second <span class="greek">τήν</span> was already present, replacing it with <span class="greek">ἣν ἔχετε</span>, when the meaning was not significantly different from the second <span class="greek">τήν</span>, seems unlikely.) Further, <span class="greek">ἀγάπην</span> comes after “saints” (thus, <span class="greek">τὴν εἰς πάντας τοὺς ἁγίους</span> <span class="greek">ἀγάπην</span>) in some witnesses (81 104 326 365 1175), and the second <span class="greek">τήν</span> is lacking (thus, <span class="greek">τὴν ἀγάπην εἰς πάντας τοὺς ἁγίους</span>) in others (D* F G). Such a floating text normally indicates inauthenticity (in this case, for <span class="greek">ἀγάπην</span>). On the other hand, <span class="greek">τὴν ἀγάπην</span> could easily have dropped out of the text by way of haplography, the Alexandrian scribes’ eyes skipping from <span class="greek">τήν</span> to <span class="greek">τήν</span>. The weak first declension feminine article-noun-article construction is common enough in the NT, occurring over 40 times, yet in four of these texts there is some ms evidence for an omission similar to Eph 1:15 (Rom 11:17; 2 Tim 3:10; Rev 11:2; 21:9). But in none of these places is the Alexandrian testimony united in the omission as it is here. Further, a wholesale Alexandrian omission of <span class="greek">τὴν ἀγάπην</span> presupposes a much stronger genealogical relation among the Alexandrian <span class="smcaps">mss</span> than many scholars would embrace. What seems to tip the scales in favor of the longer reading, however, is the intrinsic evidence: The question of whether <span class="greek">πίστις</span> could be used to mean faithfulness in the general sense toward both the Lord <i>and the saints</i> is quite problematic. All in all, a decision is difficult, but the longer reading is, with hesitation, preferred. </p></p>
<p id="n4900143"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “making mention [of you].” The participle has been translated as temporal.</p></p>
<p id="n4900144"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “I pray” are not in the Greek text, but have been supplied to clarify the meaning; v. 17 is a subordinate clause to v. 16 (“I pray” in v. 17 is implied from v. 16). Eph 1:15-23 constitutes one sentence in Greek, but a new sentence was started here in the translation in light of contemporary English usage.</p></p>
<p id="n4900145"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Father of glory.” The genitive phrase “of glory” is most likely an attributive genitive (“the glorious Father”).</p></p>
<p id="n4900146"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Spirit of wisdom and revelation,” or “a spirit of wisdom and revelation.” Verse 17 involves a complex exegetical problem revolving around the Greek term <span class="greek">πνεῦμα</span> (<span class="translit">pneuma</span>). Some take it to mean “the Spirit,” others “a spirit,” and still others “spiritual.” (1) If “the Spirit” is meant, the idea must be a metonymy of cause (the Spirit) for effect (the spiritual wisdom the Spirit provides), because the author had just indicated in vv. 13-14 that the Spirit was already given (hence, there is no need for him to pray that the Spirit be given again). But the effect the Spirit produces is wisdom and revelation. (2) If “a spirit” is meant, the idea may be that the readers will have the ability to gain wisdom and insight as they read Paul’s letters, but the exact meaning of “a spirit” remains ambiguous. (3) To take the genitives following <span class="greek">πνεῦμα</span> as <i>attributed</i> genitives (see <i>ExSyn</i> 89-91), in which the head noun (“S/spirit”) functions semantically like an adjective (“spiritual”) is both grammatically probable and exegetically consistent.</p></p>
<p id="n4900147"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the knowledge of him.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The point of the <i>knowledge of him</i> has nothing to do with what God knows, but with what believers are to know (hence, “<i><b>your</b>…knowledge</i>”). Further, the author’s prayer is that this knowledge of God would increase, not simply be initiated, since he is writing to believers who already know God (hence, “<i>your <b>growing</b> knowledge of him</i>”).</p></p>
<p id="n4900148"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900148">48</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most witnesses, especially of the Byzantine and Western textual families, though with a few significant Alexandrian witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy), add <span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">humōn</span>, “your”) after <span class="greek">καρδίας</span> (<span class="translit">kardias</span>, “heart”), though it is clearly implied in the shorter (Alexandrian) reading (found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B 6 33 1175 1739 1881). The longer reading thus looks to be a clarifying gloss, as is frequently found in the Byzantine and Western traditions. The translation above has “your” because of English requirements, not because of textual basis.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900149"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The perfect participle <span class="greek">πεφωτισμένους</span> (<span class="translit">pephōtismenous</span>) may be either part of the content of the prayer (“that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened”) or part of the basis of the prayer (“since the eyes of your heart have been enlightened”). Although the participle follows the <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) of v. 17, it is awkward grammatically in the clause. Further, perfect adverbial participles are usually causal in NT Greek. Finally, the context both here and throughout Ephesians seems to emphasize the motif of light as a property belonging to believers. Thus, it seems that the author is saying, “I know that you are saved, that you have had the blinders of the devil removed; because of this, I can now pray that you will fully understand and see the light of God’s glorious revelation.” Hence, the translation takes the participle to form a part of the basis for the prayer.</p></p>
<p id="n4900150"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the hope to which he has called you.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The hope of his calling</i>. The translation is more formally equivalent for this and the following two phrases, because of the apparently intentional literary force of the original. There is a natural cadence to the three genitive expressions (<i>hope <b>of</b> his calling</i>, <i>wealth <b>of</b> his glorious inheritance</i>, and <i>extraordinary greatness <b>of</b> his power</i>). The essence of the prayer is seen here. Paraphrased it reads as follows: “Since you are enlightened by God’s Spirit, I pray that you may comprehend the hope to which he has called you, the spiritual riches that await the saints in glory, and the spiritual power that is available to the saints now.” Thus, the prayer focuses on all three temporal aspects of our salvation as these are embedded in the genitives—the past (<i>calling</i>), the future (<i>inheritance</i>), and the present (<i>power toward us who believe</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n4900151"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900151">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of the glory of his inheritance.” Here “inheritance” is taken as an attributed genitive and the head noun, “glory,” is thus translated as an adjective, “glorious inheritance.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900152"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900152">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “immeasurable,” or “surpassing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900153"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900153">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for,” or “to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900154"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900154">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900155"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900155">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to the exercise of the might of his strength.”</p><p><b>sn</b> What has been translated as <i>exercise</i> is a term used only of supernatural power in the NT, <span class="greek">ἐνέργεια</span> (<span class="translit">energeia</span>). </p></p>
<p id="n4900156"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900156">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which” (v. 20 is a subordinate clause to v. 19).</p></p>
<p id="n4900157"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900157">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb “exercised” (the aorist of <span class="greek">ἐνεργέω</span>, <span class="translit">energeō</span>) has its nominal cognate in “exercise” in v. 19 (<span class="greek">ἐνέργεια</span>, <span class="translit">energeia</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4900158"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900158">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “This power he exercised in Christ by raising him”; <i>Grk</i> “raising him.” The adverbial participle <span class="greek">ἐγείρας</span> (<span class="translit">egeiras</span>) could be understood as temporal (“when he raised [him]”), which would be contemporaneous to the action of the finite verb “he exercised” earlier in the verse, or as means (“by raising [him]”). The participle has been translated here with the temporal nuance to allow for means to also be a possible interpretation. If the translation focused instead upon means, the temporal nuance would be lost as the time frame for the action of the participle would become indistinct.</p></p>
<p id="n4900159"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900159">59</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially of the Western and Byzantine groups (D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1241 <span class="apparatus">M</span> b r Ambst), have the indicative <span class="greek">ἐκάθισεν</span> (<span class="translit">ekathisen</span>, “he seated”) for <span class="greek">καθίσας</span> (<span class="translit">kathisas</span>, “when he seated, by seating”). The indicative is thus coordinate with <span class="greek">ἐνήργησεν</span> (<span class="translit">enērgēsen</span>, “he exercised”) and provides an additional statement to “he exercised his power.” The participle (found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>92vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B 0278 33 81 1175 1505 1739 1881 2464 <i>al</i>), on the other hand, is coordinate with <span class="greek">ἐγείρας</span> (<span class="translit">egeiras</span>) and as such provides evidence of God’s power: He exercised his power <i>by</i> raising Christ from the dead and <i>by</i> seating him at his right hand. As intriguing as the indicative reading is, it is most likely an intentional alteration of the original wording. It may have been theologically motivated for it implicitly seems to restrict the exercise of God’s power to the resurrection.</p></p>
<p id="n4900160"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900160">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Eph 1:19-20</i>. The point made in these verses is that the power required to live a life pleasing to God is the same power that raised Christ from the dead. For a similar thought, cf. John 15:1-11.</p></p>
<p id="n4900161"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900161">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4900162"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900162">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “subjected.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900163"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900163">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (Christ) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4900164"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900164">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 8:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4900165"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900165">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and gave him as head over all things to the church.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900166"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900166">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which is.” The antecedent of “which” is easily lost in English, though in Greek it is quite clear. In the translation “church” is repeated to clarify the referent.</p></p>
<p id="n4900167"><a href="file1147.xhtml#n4900167">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “who is filled entirely.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The idea of <i>all in all</i> is either related to the universe (hence, he fills the whole universe entirely) or the church universal (hence, Christ fills the church entirely with his presence and power).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
