<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Hebrews 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> For every high priest is taken from among the people<sup><a id="n580051" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n580051">1</a></sup> and appointed<sup><a id="n580052" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n580052">2</a></sup> to represent them before God,<sup><a id="n580053" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n580053">3</a></sup> to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins. <span class="verse">5:2</span> He is able to deal compassionately with those who are ignorant and erring, since he also is subject to weakness, <span class="verse">5:3</span> and for this reason he is obligated to make sin offerings for himself as well as for the people. <span class="verse">5:4</span> And no one assumes this honor<sup><a id="n580054" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n580054">4</a></sup> on his own initiative,<sup><a id="n580055" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n580055">5</a></sup> but only when called to it by God,<sup><a id="n580056" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n580056">6</a></sup> as in fact Aaron was. <span class="verse">5:5</span> So also Christ did not glorify himself in becoming high priest, but the one who glorified him was God,<sup><a id="n580057" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n580057">7</a></sup> who said to him, “<b><i>You are my Son! Today I have fathered you</i></b>,”<sup><a id="n580058" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n580058">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:6</span> as also in another place God<sup><a id="n580059" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n580059">9</a></sup> says, “<b><i>You are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n5800510" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800510">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:7</span> During his earthly life<sup><a id="n5800511" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800511">11</a></sup> Christ<sup><a id="n5800512" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800512">12</a></sup> offered<sup><a id="n5800513" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800513">13</a></sup> both requests and supplications, with loud cries and tears, to the one who was able to save him from death and he was heard because of his devotion. <span class="verse">5:8</span> Although he was a son, he learned obedience through the things he suffered.<sup><a id="n5800514" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800514">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:9</span> And by being perfected in this way, he became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey him, <span class="verse">5:10</span> and he was designated<sup><a id="n5800515" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800515">15</a></sup> by God as high priest <b><i>in</i></b> <b><i>the order of Melchizedek</i></b>.<sup><a id="n5800516" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800516">16</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Need to Move on to Maturity</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:11</span> On this topic we have much to say<sup><a id="n5800517" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800517">17</a></sup> and it is difficult to explain, since you have become sluggish<sup><a id="n5800518" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800518">18</a></sup> in hearing. <span class="verse">5:12</span> For though you should in fact be teachers by this time,<sup><a id="n5800519" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800519">19</a></sup> you need someone to teach you the beginning elements of God’s utterances.<sup><a id="n5800520" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800520">20</a></sup> You have gone back to needing<sup><a id="n5800521" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800521">21</a></sup> milk, not<sup><a id="n5800522" href="file1196_notes.xhtml#n5800522">22</a></sup> solid food. <span class="verse">5:13</span> For everyone who lives on milk is inexperienced in the message of righteousness, because he is an infant. <span class="verse">5:14</span> But solid food is for the mature, whose perceptions are trained by practice to discern both good and evil. </p>

</body>
</html>