<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Submission to Civil Government</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> Let every person be subject to the governing authorities. For there is no authority except by God’s appointment,<sup><a id="n450131" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n450131">1</a></sup> and the authorities that exist have been instituted by God. <span class="verse">13:2</span> So the person who resists such authority<sup><a id="n450132" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n450132">2</a></sup> resists the ordinance of God, and those who resist will incur judgment <span class="verse">13:3</span> (for rulers cause no fear for good conduct but for bad). Do you desire not to fear authority? Do good and you will receive its commendation<span class="verse">13:4</span> because it is God’s servant for your well-being. But be afraid if you do wrong because government<sup><a id="n450133" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n450133">3</a></sup> does not bear the sword for nothing. It is God’s servant to administer punishment on the person who does wrong. <span class="verse">13:5</span> Therefore it is necessary to be in subjection, not only because of the wrath of the authorities<sup><a id="n450134" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n450134">4</a></sup> but also because of your conscience.<sup><a id="n450135" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n450135">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:6</span> For this reason you also pay taxes, for the authorities<sup><a id="n450136" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n450136">6</a></sup> are God’s servants devoted to governing.<sup><a id="n450137" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n450137">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:7</span> Pay everyone what is owed: taxes to whom taxes are due, revenue to whom revenue is due, respect to whom respect is due, honor to whom honor is due. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Love Neighbors</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:8</span> Owe no one anything, except to love one another, for the one who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law. <span class="verse">13:9</span> For the commandments,<sup><a id="n450138" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n450138">8</a></sup> “<i><b>Do not commit adultery, do not murder, do not steal, do not covet</b>,</i>”<sup><a id="n450139" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n450139">9</a></sup> (and if there is any other commandment) are summed up in this, “<b><i>Love your neighbor as yourself</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4501310" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n4501310">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:10</span> Love does no wrong to a neighbor. Therefore love is the fulfillment of the law. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Motivation to Godly Conduct</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:11</span> And do this<sup><a id="n4501311" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n4501311">11</a></sup> because we know<sup><a id="n4501312" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n4501312">12</a></sup> the time, that it is already the hour for us to awake from sleep, for our salvation is now nearer than when we became believers. <span class="verse">13:12</span> The night has advanced toward dawn; the day is near. So then we must lay aside the works of darkness, and put on the weapons of light. <span class="verse">13:13</span> Let us live decently as in the daytime, not in carousing and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and sensuality, not in discord and jealousy. <span class="verse">13:14</span> Instead, put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to arouse its desires.<sup><a id="n4501313" href="file1104_notes.xhtml#n4501313">13</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>