<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 15</h2>
<p id="n450151"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n450151">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and not please ourselves.” NT Greek negatives used in contrast like this are often not absolute, but relative: “not so much one as the other.”</p></p>
<p id="n450152"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n450152">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 69:9.</p></p>
<p id="n450153"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n450153">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “grant you to think the same among one another.”</p></p>
<p id="n450154"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n450154">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of the circumcision”; that is, the Jews.</p></p>
<p id="n450155"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n450155">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the patriarchs.”</p></p>
<p id="n450156"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n450156">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> There are two major syntactical alternatives which are both awkward: (1) One could make “glorify” dependent on “Christ has become a minister” and coordinate with “to confirm” and the result would be rendered “Christ has become a minister of circumcision to confirm the promises…and so that the Gentiles might glorify God.” (2) One could make “glorify” dependent on “I tell you” and coordinate with “Christ has become a minister” and the result would be rendered “I tell you that Christ has become a minister of circumcision…and that the Gentiles glorify God.” The second rendering is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n450157"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n450157">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 18:49.</p></p>
<p id="n450158"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n450158">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 32:43.</p></p>
<p id="n450159"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n450159">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 117:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4501510"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501510">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 11:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4501511"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the believing” or “as [you] believe,” with the object “him” supplied from the context. The referent could be God (15:13a) or Christ (15:12).</p></p>
<p id="n4501512"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4501513"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “serving.” This is a continuation of the previous sentence in the Greek text, but in keeping with contemporary English style, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4501514"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive in the phrase <span class="greek">τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">to euangelion tou theou</span>, “the gospel of God”) could be translated as either a subjective genitive (“the gospel which God brings”) or an objective genitive (“the gospel about God”). Either is grammatically possible. This is possibly an instance of a plenary genitive (see <i>ExSyn</i> 119-21; M. Zerwick, <i>Biblical Greek</i>, §§36-39). If so, an interplay between the two concepts is intended: The gospel which God brings is in fact the gospel about himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4501515"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that the offering of the Gentiles may become acceptable.” This could be understood to refer to an offering belonging to the Gentiles (a possessive genitive) or made by the Gentiles (subjective genitive), but more likely the phrase should be understood as an appositive genitive, with the Gentiles themselves consisting of the offering (so J. D. G. Dunn, <i>Romans</i> [WBC 38], 2:860). The latter view is reflected in the translation “so that the Gentiles may become an acceptable offering.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501516"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501516">16</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ After <span class="greek">οὖν</span> (<span class="translit">oun</span>), several significant Alexandrian and Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B C D F G 81 365) have <span class="greek">τήν</span> (<span class="translit">tēn</span>). The article is lacking in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1241 1505 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> however. <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> supplies a relative pronoun and has a different reading entirely (“which I have [as a] boast”). Articles were frequently introduced to clarify the meaning of the text. In this instance, since the word modified (<span class="greek">καύχησιν</span>, <span class="translit">kauchēsin</span>) is third declension, a visual oversight (resulting in omission) is less likely. Hence, the shorter reading is probably earlier. The difference in translation between these first two options is negligible (“I have <i>the</i> boast” or “I have <i>a</i> boast”). NA<sup>28</sup> puts the article in brackets, indicating some doubt as to its authenticity.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Therefore I have a boast.” </p></p>
<p id="n4501517"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “unto obedience.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501518"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501518">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 52:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4501519"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “now no longer having a place…I have.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501520"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but having a desire…for many years.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501521"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and to be helped by you.” The passive construction was changed to an active one in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4501522"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to them”; the referent (the Jerusalem saints) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4501523"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have sealed this fruit to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501524"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4501525"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Verses 30-31 form one long sentence in the Greek but have been divided into two distinct sentences for clarity in English. </p></p>
<p id="n4501526"><a href="file1106.xhtml#n4501526">26</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> lack the word “Amen” here, one of them (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup>) also inserting 16:25-27 at this point. See the <b>tc</b> note at 16:25 for more information. </p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
