<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Mark 4</h2>
<p id="n410041"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n410041">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note at Mark 1:19 for a description of the first-century fishing boat discovered in 1986 near Tiberias on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n410042"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n410042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and all the crowd.” The clause in this phrase, although coordinate in terms of grammar, is logically subordinate to the previous clause.</p></p>
<p id="n410043"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n410043">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> Though parables can contain a variety of figures of speech (cf. 2:19-22; 3:23-25; 4:3-9, 26-32; 7:15-17; 13:28), many times they are simply stories that attempt to teach spiritual truth (which is unknown to the hearers) by using a comparison with something known to the hearers. In general, parables usually advance a single idea, though there may be many parts and characters in a single parable and subordinate ideas may expand the main idea further. The beauty of using the parable as a teaching device is that it draws the listener into the story, elicits an evaluation, and demands a response.</p></p>
<p id="n410044"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n410044">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>A sower went out to sow</i>. The background for this well-known parable, drawn from a typical scene in the Palestinian countryside, is a field through which a well worn path runs. Sowing would occur in late fall or early winter (October to December) in the rainy season, looking for sprouting in April or May and a June harvest. The use of seed as a figure for God’s giving life has OT roots (Isa 55:10-11). The point of the parable of the sower is to illustrate the various responses to the message of the kingdom of God (cf. 4:11).</p></p>
<p id="n410045"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n410045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Mark’s version of the parable, like Luke’s (cf. Luke 8:4-8), uses the collective singular to refer to the seed throughout, so singular pronouns have been used consistently throughout this parable in the English translation. However, the parallel account in Matt 13:1-9 begins with plural pronouns in v. 4 but then switches to the collective singular in v. 5 ff.</p></p>
<p id="n410046"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n410046">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>rocky ground</i> in Palestine would be a limestone base lying right under the soil.</p></p>
<p id="n410047"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n410047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it had no depth of earth.”</p></p>
<p id="n410048"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n410048">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it did not have root.”</p></p>
<p id="n410049"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n410049">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> Palestinian weeds like these <i>thorns</i> could grow up to 6 feet in height and have a major root system.</p></p>
<p id="n4100410"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100410">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, crowded out the good plants.</p></p>
<p id="n4100411"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in the final stage of the parable.</p></p>
<p id="n4100412"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “had better listen!” captures the force of the third person imperative more effectively than the traditional “let him hear,” which sounds more like a permissive than an imperative to the modern English reader. This was Jesus’ common expression to listen and heed carefully (cf. Matt 11:15; 13:9, 43; Mark 4:23; Luke 8:8; 14:35).</p></p>
<p id="n4100413"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the mystery.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The key term <i>secret</i> (<span class="greek">μυστήριον</span>, <span class="translit">mustērion</span>) can mean either (1) a new revelation or (2) a revealing interpretation of existing revelation as in Dan 2:17-23, 27-30. Jesus seems to be explaining how current events develop old promises, since the NT consistently links the events of Jesus’ ministry and message with old promises (Rom 1:1-4; Heb 1:1-2). The traditional translation of this word, “mystery,” is misleading to the modern English reader because it suggests a secret which people have tried to uncover but which they have failed to understand (L&amp;N 28.77).</p></p>
<p id="n4100414"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100414">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4100415"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is an example of a “divine passive,” with God understood to be the source of the revelation (see <i>ExSyn</i> 437-38).</p></p>
<p id="n4100416"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100416">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 6:9-10. Thus parables both conceal or reveal depending on whether one is open to hearing what they teach.</p></p>
<p id="n4100417"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100418"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100418">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> Interestingly, the synoptic parallels each use a different word for Satan here: Matt 13:19 has “the evil one,” while Luke 8:12 has “the devil.” This illustrates the fluidity of the gospel tradition in often using synonyms at the same point of the parallel tradition.</p></p>
<p id="n4100419"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100419">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>word</i> of Jesus has the potential to save if it germinates in a person’s heart, something the devil is very much against.</p></p>
<p id="n4100420"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4100421"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “are temporary.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100422"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4100423"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the deceitfulness of riches.” Cf. BDAG 99 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπάτη</span> 1, “the seduction which comes from wealth.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100424"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100424">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, their concern for spiritual things is crowded out by material things.</p></p>
<p id="n4100425"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4100426"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100426">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>lamp</i> is probably an ancient oil burning lamp or perhaps a candlestick. Jesus is comparing revelation to light, particularly the revelation of his ministry.</p></p>
<p id="n4100427"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a bowl”; this refers to any container for dry material of about eight liters (two gallons) capacity. It could be translated “basket, box, bowl” (L&amp;N 6.151).</p></p>
<p id="n4100428"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100428">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “disclosed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100429"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100429">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “had better listen!” captures the force of the third person imperative more effectively than the traditional “let him hear,” which sounds more like a permissive than an imperative to the modern English reader. This was Jesus’ common expression to listen and heed carefully (cf. Matt 11:15; 13:9, 43; Mark 4:9; Luke 8:8; 14:35).</p></p>
<p id="n4100430"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the measure with which you measure it will be measured to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100431"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4100432"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100432">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>What he has will be taken from him</i>. The meaning is that the one who accepts Jesus’ teaching concerning his person and the kingdom will receive a share in the kingdom now and even more in the future, but for the one who rejects Jesus’ words, the opportunity that that person presently possesses with respect to the kingdom will someday be taken away forever. </p></p>
<p id="n4100433"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100433">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4100434"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100434">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> KJV “corn” is the result of British English, in which “corn” refers to the main cereal crop of a district, wheat in England and oats in Scotland (British English uses “maize” to refer to American corn).</p></p>
<p id="n4100435"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100435">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">εὐθύς</span> (<span class="translit">euthus</span>, often translated “immediately” or “right away”) has not been translated here. It sometimes occurs with a weakened, inferential use (BDAG 406 s.v. 2), not contributing significantly to the flow of the narrative. For further discussion, see R. J. Decker, <i>Temporal Deixis of the Greek Verb in the Gospel of Mark with Reference to Verbal Aspect</i> (SBG 10), 73-77.</p></p>
<p id="n4100436"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100436">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Because the harvest has come</i>. This parable is found only in Mark (cf. Matt 13:24-30) and presents a complete picture of the coming of God’s kingdom: (1) sowing; (2) growth; (3) harvest. Some understand the parable as a reference to evangelism. While this is certainly involved, it does not seem to be the central idea. In contrast to the parable of the sower which emphasizes the quality of the different soils, this parable emphasizes the power of the seed to cause growth (with the clear implication that the mysterious growth of the kingdom is accomplished by God), apart from human understanding and observation.</p></p>
<p id="n4100437"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100437">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. See the note on this phrase in v. 26.</p></p>
<p id="n4100438"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100438">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> Mustard seeds are known for their tiny size.</p></p>
<p id="n4100439"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100439">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Mark 4:31-32 is fairly awkward in Greek. Literally the sentence reads as follows: “As a mustard seed, which when sown in the earth, being the smallest of all the seeds in the earth, and when it is sown, it grows up…” The structure has been rendered in more idiomatic English, although some of the awkward structure has been retained for rhetorical effect.</p></p>
<p id="n4100440"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100440">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the birds of the sky” or “the birds of the heaven”; the Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) may be translated either “sky” or “heaven,” depending on the context. The idiomatic expression “birds of the sky” refers to wild birds as opposed to domesticated fowl (cf. BDAG 809 s.v. <span class="greek">πετεινόν</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4100441"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100441">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of the parable seems to be that while the kingdom of God may appear to have insignificant and unnoticeable beginnings (i.e., in the ministry of Jesus), it will someday (i.e., at the second advent) be great and quite expansive. The kingdom, however, is not to be equated with the church, but rather the church is an expression of the kingdom. Also, there is important OT background in the image of a small plant that grew and became a tree: Ezek 17:22-24 pictures the reemergence of the Davidic house where people can find calm and shelter. Like the mustard seed, it would start out small but grow to significant size.</p></p>
<p id="n4100442"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100442">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100443"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100443">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100444"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100444">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “of the lake” is not in the Greek text but is clearly implied; it has been supplied here for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100445"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100445">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the response to Jesus’ request.</p></p>
<p id="n4100446"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100446">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> It is possible that this prepositional phrase modifies “as he was,” not “they took him along.” The meaning would then be “they took him along in the boat in which he was already sitting” (see 4:1).</p><p><b>sn</b> A <i>boat</i> that held all the disciples would be of significant size. See the note at Mark 1:19 for a description of the first-century fishing boat discovered in 1986 near Tiberias on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n4100447"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100447">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4100448"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100448">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a squall.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The Sea of Galilee is located in a depression some 700 ft (200 m) below sea level and is surrounded by hills. Frequently a rush of wind and the right mix of temperatures can cause a storm to come suddenly on the lake. Storms on the Sea of Galilee were known for their suddenness and violence.</p></p>
<p id="n4100449"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100449">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4100450"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100450">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100451"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100451">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “commanded” (often with the implication of a threat, L&amp;N 33.331).</p></p>
<p id="n4100452"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100452">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> Who has authority over the seas and winds is discussed in the OT: Pss 104:3; 135:7; 107:23-30. When Jesus <i>rebuked the wind</i> and <i>the sea</i> he was making a statement about who he was.</p></p>
<p id="n4100453"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100453">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100454"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100454">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ authority over creation raised a question for the disciples about who he was exactly (<i>Who then is this?</i>). This verse shows that the disciples followed Jesus even though they did not know all about him yet.</p></p>
<p id="n4100455"><a href="file1002.xhtml#n4100455">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> This section in Mark (4:35-5:43) contains four miracles: (1) the calming of the storm; (2) the exorcism of the demon-possessed man; (3) the giving of life to Jairus’ daughter; (4) the healing of the woman hemorrhaging for twelve years. All these miracles demonstrate Jesus’ right to proclaim the kingdom message and his sovereign authority over forces, directly or indirectly, hostile to the kingdom. The last three may have been brought together to show that Jesus had power over all defilement, since contact with graves, blood, or a corpse was regarded under Jewish law as causing a state of ritual uncleanness. </p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
