<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 17</h2>
<p id="n660171"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n660171">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660172"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n660172">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with me.” The translation “with me” implies that John was engaged in a dialogue with the one speaking to him (e.g., Jesus or an angel) when in reality it was a one-sided conversation, with John doing all the listening. For this reason, <span class="greek">μετ᾿ ἐμοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">met</span>’<span class="translit"> emou</span>, “with me”) was translated as “to me.”</p></p>
<p id="n660173"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n660173">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here one Greek term, <span class="greek">κρίμα</span> (<span class="translit">krima</span>), has been translated by the two English terms “condemnation” and “punishment.” See BDAG 567 s.v. 4.b, “mostly in an unfavorable sense, of the <i>condemnatory verdict</i> and sometimes the subsequent <i>punishment</i> itself 2 Pt 2:3; Jd 4…<span class="greek">τὸ κ</span>.<span class="greek"> τῆς πόρνης</span> <i>the condemnation and punishment of the prostitute</i> Rv 17:1.”</p></p>
<p id="n660174"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n660174">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a cognate noun of the verb translated “sexual immorality” earlier in the verse, but here the qualifier “sexual” has not been repeated for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n660175"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n660175">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the angel’s invitation to witness the fate of the prostitute.</p></p>
<p id="n660176"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n660176">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the spirit.” “Spirit” could refer either to the Holy Spirit or the human spirit, but in either case John was in “a state of spiritual exaltation best described as a trance” (R. H. Mounce, <i>Revelation</i> [NICNT], 75).</p></p>
<p id="n660177"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n660177">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert.”</p></p>
<p id="n660178"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n660178">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “there” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n660179"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n660179">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the detailed description of the woman, which is somewhat parenthetical in nature.</p></p>
<p id="n6601710"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601710">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “clothing” is supplied to clarify that the words “purple” and “scarlet” refer to cloth or garments rather than colors.</p></p>
<p id="n6601711"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601711">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “gilded with gold” (an instance of semantic reinforcement, see L&amp;N 49.29).</p></p>
<p id="n6601712"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601712">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “pearls, having in her hand.” Due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6601713"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601713">13</a> <p><b>tc</b> Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (including 1611 1854 2053 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup>) read “sexual immorality on/of the earth” (<span class="greek">πορνείας τῆς γῆς</span>, <span class="translit">porneias tēs gēs</span>) instead of “her sexual immorality.” Other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> sy<sup>h</sup>** [co]) read “her sexual immorality and the earth’s” (<span class="greek">πορνείας αὐτῆς καὶ τῆς γῆς</span>, <span class="translit">porneias autēs kai tēs gēs</span>). The translation is a rendering of <span class="greek">πορνείας αὐτῆς</span>, found in A 1006 2344 <i>al</i>. It seems that the first reading “sexuality immorality on/of the earth” was a scribal mistake in which letters may have been confused (<span class="uncial">auths</span> would have been read as <span class="uncial">thsghs</span>), or was perhaps influenced by the presence of “of the world” (<span class="greek">τῆς γῆς</span>) at the end of v. 5. The earliest wording seems to be “her sexual immorality”; codex <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> has conflated the two readings. </p></p>
<p id="n6601714"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601714">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601715"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601715">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Some translations consider the word <span class="greek">μυστήριον</span> (<span class="translit">mustērion</span>, “mystery”) a part of the name written (“Mystery Babylon the Great,” so KJV, NIV), but the gender of both <span class="greek">ὄνομα</span> (<span class="translit">onoma</span>, “name”) and <span class="greek">μυστήριον</span> are neuter, while the gender of “Babylon” is feminine. This strongly suggests that <span class="greek">μυστήριον</span> should be understood as an appositive to <span class="greek">ὄνομα</span> (“a name, i.e., a mystery”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601716"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601716">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of the witnesses to Jesus.” Here the genitive <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsou</span>) is taken as an objective genitive; Jesus is the object of their testimony.</p></p>
<p id="n6601717"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601717">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601718"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601718">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I marveled a great marvel” (an idiom for great astonishment).</p></p>
<p id="n6601719"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601719">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6601720"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I will tell you,” but since what follows is the angel’s interpretation of the vision, “interpret for you” is the preferred translation here.</p></p>
<p id="n6601721"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601721">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 2 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄβυσσος</span> 2 states, “<i>netherworld</i>, <i>abyss,</i> esp. the abode of the dead Ro 10:7 (Ps 106:26) and of demons Lk 8:31; dungeon where the devil is kept Rv 20:3; abode of the <span class="greek">θηρίον</span>, the Antichrist 11:7; 17:8; of <span class="greek">᾿Αβαδδών</span> (q.v.), the angel of the underworld 9:11…<span class="greek">φρέαρ τῆς ἀ</span>. 9:1f; capable of being sealed 9:1; 20:1, 3.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601722"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601722">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. </p></p>
<p id="n6601723"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601723">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Some translations take the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) here as causal: “because he was, and is not, but is to come” (so NIV, NRSV), but it is much more likely that the subject of the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> clause has been assimilated into the main clause: “when they see the beast, that he was…” = “when they see that the beast was” (so BDAG 732 s.v. <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> 1.f, where Rev 17:8 is listed).</p></p>
<p id="n6601724"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601724">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Here is the mind that has wisdom.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601725"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601725">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> It is important to note that the height of “mountains” versus “hills” or other topographical terms is somewhat relative. In terms of Palestinian topography, Mount Tabor (traditionally regarded as the mount of transfiguration) is some 1,800 ft (550 m) above sea level, while the Mount of Olives is only some 100 ft (30 m) higher than Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n6601726"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601726">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, one currently reigns.</p></p>
<p id="n6601727"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601727">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. </p></p>
<p id="n6601728"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601728">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601729"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601729">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation “ruling authority” for <span class="greek">ἐξουσία</span> (<span class="translit">exousia</span>) see L&amp;N 37.35.</p></p>
<p id="n6601730"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601730">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “kings” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to clarify the referent.</p></p>
<p id="n6601731"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601731">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 636 s.v. <span class="greek">μετά</span> A.2.a.<span class="greek">α</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n6601732"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601732">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601733"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601733">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601734"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601734">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and multitudes,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here and before the following term since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n6601735"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601735">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. </p></p>
<p id="n6601736"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601736">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> A new sentence was started here in the translation. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601737"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601737">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> The final clause could also be turned into an adverbial clause of means: “They will consume her flesh by burning her with fire.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601738"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601738">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hearts.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601739"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601739">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “his intent.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601740"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601740">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> The infinitive <span class="greek">ποιῆσαι</span> (<span class="translit">poiēsai</span>) was translated here as giving the logical means by which God’s purpose was carried out.</p></p>
<p id="n6601741"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601741">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 203 s.v. <span class="greek">γνώμη</span> 4 states, “<i>declaration, decision, resolution</i>…of God Rv 17:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601742"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601742">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> For this translation see BDAG 168 s.v. <span class="greek">βασιλεία</span> 1.a, “<i>kingship, royal power, royal rule</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601743"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601743">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “completed.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601744"><a href="file1250.xhtml#n6601744">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Because this remark is somewhat resumptive in nature, “as for” is used in the translation.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
