<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Hebrews 5</h2>
<p id="n580051"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n580051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from among men,” but since the point in context is shared humanity (rather than shared maleness), the plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>) has been translated “people.”</p></p>
<p id="n580052"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n580052">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who is taken from among people is appointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n580053"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n580053">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “appointed on behalf of people in reference to things relating to God.”</p></p>
<p id="n580054"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n580054">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Honor</i> refers here to the honor of the high priesthood.</p></p>
<p id="n580055"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n580055">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by himself, on his own.”</p></p>
<p id="n580056"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n580056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “being called by God.”</p></p>
<p id="n580057"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n580057">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n580058"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n580058">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I have begotten you”; see Heb 1:5.</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 2:7.</p></p>
<p id="n580059"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n580059">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5800510"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800510">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 110:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5800511"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the days of his flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800512"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Christ) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5800513"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who…having offered,” continuing the description of Christ from Heb 5:5-6.</p></p>
<p id="n5800514"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800514">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is a wordplay in the Greek text between the verbs “learned” (<span class="greek">ἔμαθεν</span>, <span class="translit">emathen</span>) and “suffered” (<span class="greek">ἔπαθεν</span>, <span class="translit">epathen</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n5800515"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having been designated,” continuing the thought of Heb 5:9.</p></p>
<p id="n5800516"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800516">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>in the order of Melchizedek</i> picks up the quotation from Ps 110:4 in Heb 5:6.</p></p>
<p id="n5800517"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “concerning which the message for us is great.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800518"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dull.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800519"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because of the time.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800520"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the elements of the beginning of the oracles of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800521"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you have come to have a need for.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800522"><a href="file1196.xhtml#n5800522">22</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most texts, including some early and significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A B* D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0122 0278 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy Cl), have <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”) immediately preceding <span class="greek">οὐ</span> (<span class="translit">ou</span>, “not”), but other equally significant witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B<sup>2</sup> C 33 81 1739 lat Or Did) lack the conjunction. As it was a natural tendency for scribes to add a coordinating conjunction, the <span class="greek">καί</span> appears to be a motivated reading. On balance, it is probably best to regard the shorter reading as authentic. NA<sup>28</sup> has <span class="greek">καί</span> in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
