<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 4</h2>
<p id="n660041"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n660041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and behold.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n660042"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n660042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the sky” (the same Greek word means both “heaven” and “sky”).</p></p>
<p id="n660043"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n660043">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with me.” The translation “with me” implies that John was engaged in a dialogue with the one speaking to him (e.g., Jesus or an angel) when in reality it was a one-sided conversation, with John doing all the listening. For this reason, <span class="greek">μετ᾿ ἐμοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">met</span>’<span class="translit"> emou</span>, “with me”) was translated as “to me.”</p></p>
<p id="n660044"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n660044">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>speaking to me like a trumpet</i> refers back to Rev 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n660045"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n660045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>), much like the <i>vav-</i>consecutive in Hebrew, appears to be introducing a final/purpose clause here rather than a coordinate clause.</p></p>
<p id="n660046"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n660046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the spirit.” “Spirit” could refer either to the Holy Spirit or the human spirit, but in either case John was in “a state of spiritual exaltation best described as a trance” (R. H. Mounce, <i>Revelation</i> [NICNT], 75).</p></p>
<p id="n660047"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n660047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and behold.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n660048"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n660048">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 537 s.v. <span class="greek">κεῖμαι</span> 2 gives the translation “stand” for the term in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n660049"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n660049">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “jasper stone.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Jasper</i> was a semiprecious gemstone, probably green in color (L&amp;N 2.30).</p></p>
<p id="n6600410"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600410">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Carnelian</i> was a semiprecious gemstone, usually red in color (L&amp;N 2.36).</p></p>
<p id="n6600411"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a rainbow emerald-like in appearance.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600412"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600413"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the words “They were” to indicate the connection to the preceding material.</p></p>
<p id="n6600414"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600414">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>crown</i> in Rev 3:11.</p></p>
<p id="n6600415"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600416"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sounds,” “voices.” It is not entirely clear what this refers to. BDAG 1071 s.v. <span class="greek">φωνή</span> 1 states, “In Rv we have <span class="greek">ἀστραπαὶ καὶ φωναὶ καὶ βρονταί</span> (cp. Ex 19:16) 4:5; 8:5; 11:19; 16:18 (are certain other sounds in nature thought of here in addition to thunder, as e.g. the roar of the storm?…).”</p></p>
<p id="n6600417"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600417">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> Some interpret the <i>seven spirits of God</i> as angelic beings, while others see them as a reference to the sevenfold ministry of the Holy Spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n6600418"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> This could refer to rock crystal, but it is possible this refers to ice (an older meaning). See BDAG 571 s.v. <span class="greek">κρύσταλλος</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n6600419"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600420"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Perhaps, “in the middle of the throne area” (see L&amp;N 83.10).</p></p>
<p id="n6600421"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the meaning of <span class="greek">ζῴον</span> (<span class="translit">zōon</span>) BDAG 431 s.v. 2 states, “Of the four peculiar beings at God’s throne, whose description Rv 4:6-9 reminds one of the <span class="greek">ζῷα</span> in Ezk 1:5ff, the cherubim. S. also Rv 5:6, 8, 11, 14; 6:1, 3, 5-7; 7:11; 14:3; 15:7; 19:4.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600422"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600423"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Both here and before the phrase “the third,” <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n6600424"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “six wings apiece,” but this is redundant with “each one” in English.</p></p>
<p id="n6600425"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Some translations render <span class="greek">ἔσωθεν</span> (<span class="translit">esōthen</span>) as “under [its] wings,” but the description could also mean “filled all around on the outside and on the inside with eyes.” Since the referent is not available to the interpreter, the exact force is difficult to determine.</p></p>
<p id="n6600426"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “They never stop saying day and night.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600427"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this word BDAG 755 s.v. <span class="greek">παντοκράτωρ</span> states, “the <i>Almighty, All-Powerful, Omnipotent</i> (<i>One</i>) only of God…(<span class="greek">ὁ</span>)<span class="greek"> κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ π</span>.…Rv 1:8; 4:8; 11:17; 15:3; 16:7; 21:22.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from (or an allusion to) Isa 6:3.</p></p>
<p id="n6600428"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600428">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n6600429"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600429">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the twenty-four elders fall down.” BDAG 815 s.v. <span class="greek">πίπτω</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span>. has “<i>fall down, throw oneself to the ground</i> as a sign of devotion or humility, before high-ranking persons or divine beings.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600430"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600430">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>crown</i> in Rev 3:11.</p></p>
<p id="n6600431"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> The pronoun “his” is understood from the demonstrative force of the article <span class="greek">τοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou</span>) before <span class="greek">θρόνου</span> (<span class="translit">thronou</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6600432"><a href="file1237.xhtml#n6600432">32</a> <p><b>tc</b> The past tense of “they existed” (<span class="greek">ἦσαν</span>, <span class="translit">ēsan</span>) and the order of the expression “they existed and were created” seems backwards both logically and chronologically. The text as it stands is the more difficult reading and seems to have given rise to codex A omitting the final “they were created,” 2329 replacing “they existed” (<span class="greek">ἦσαν</span>) with “have come into being” (<span class="greek">ἐγένοντο</span>, <span class="translit">egeneto</span>), and 046 adding <span class="greek">οὐκ</span> (<span class="translit">ouk</span>, “not”) before <span class="greek">ἦσαν</span> (“they did not exist, [but were created]”). Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (1854 2050 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup> sa) also attempt to alleviate the problem by replacing <span class="greek">ἦσαν</span> with “they are” (<span class="greek">εἰσιν</span>, <span class="translit">eisin</span>).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
