<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 19</h2>
<p id="n420191"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n420191">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And entering, he passed through”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n420193"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n420193">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the introduction of a new character. The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n420194"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n420194">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is the one place in the NT the office of <i>chief tax collector</i> is noted. If the term refers to a managerial rank, this individual would organize and oversee the other tax collectors and collect significant commissions (see also the note on the word <i>tax collector</i> in 3:12). It is possible, however, that in this context the term simply means “major tax collector” and is a comment on the individual’s importance or wealth rather than his rank (see D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> [BECNT] 1:1516).</p></p>
<p id="n420195"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n420195">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n420196"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n420196">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He was trying to see who Jesus was.”</p></p>
<p id="n420197"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n420197">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he was not able to because of the crowd, for he was short in stature.”</p></p>
<p id="n420198"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n420198">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Zacchaeus not being able to see over the crowd.</p></p>
<p id="n420199"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n420199">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>sycamore tree</i> would have large branches near the ground like an oak tree and would be fairly easy to climb. These trees reach a height of some 50 ft (about 15 m).</p></p>
<p id="n4201910"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that one”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201911"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201911">11</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A [D] W [<span class="greek">Ψ</span>] ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33<sup>vid</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt) read “Jesus looking up, saw him and said.” The words “saw him and” are not in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L T <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 579 1241 2542 co. Both the testimony for the omission and the natural tendency toward scribal expansion argue for the shorter reading here.</p></p>
<p id="n4201912"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201912">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hastening, come down.” <span class="greek">σπεύσας</span> (<span class="translit">speusas</span>) has been translated as a participle of manner.</p></p>
<p id="n4201913"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201913">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I must stay</i>. Jesus revealed the necessity of his associating with people like Zacchaeus (5:31-32). This act of fellowship indicated acceptance.</p></p>
<p id="n4201914"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201914">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>today</i> here and in v. 9, see the note on <i>today</i> in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4201915"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201915">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hastening, he came down.” <span class="greek">σπεύσας</span> (<span class="translit">speusas</span>) has been translated as a participle of manner.</p></p>
<p id="n4201916"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201916">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201917"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">χαίρων</span> (<span class="translit">chairōn</span>) has been taken as indicating manner.</p><p><b>sn</b> Zacchaeus responded <i>joyfully</i>. Luke likes to mention joy as a response to what God was doing (1:14; 2:10; 10:20; 13:17; 15:5, 32; 19:37; 24:41, 52).</p></p>
<p id="n4201918"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201918">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent is unspecified but is probably the crowd in general, who would have no great love for a man like Zacchaeus who had enriched himself many times over at their expense.</p></p>
<p id="n4201919"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term is used only twice in the NT, both times in Luke (here and 15:2) and has negative connotations both times (BDAG 227 s.v. <span class="greek">διαγογγύζω</span>). The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201920"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201920">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> Being the <i>guest of a man who is a sinner</i> was a common complaint about Jesus: Luke 5:31-32; 7:37-50; 15:1-2.</p></p>
<p id="n4201921"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201921">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> Zacchaeus was a penitent man who resolved on the spot to act differently in the face of Jesus’ acceptance of him. In resolving to <i>give</i> half his <i>possessions</i> to the poor, Zacchaeus was not defending himself against the crowd’s charges and claiming to be righteous. Rather as a result of this meeting with Jesus, he was a changed individual. So Jesus could speak of salvation coming that day (v. 9) and of the lost being saved (v. 10).</p></p>
<p id="n4201922"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201922">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a first class condition in the Greek text. It virtually confesses fraud.</p></p>
<p id="n4201923"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201923">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative</p></p>
<p id="n4201924"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201924">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is one of the few uses of the specific term <i>salvation</i> in Luke (1:69, 71, 77), though the concept runs throughout the Gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n4201925"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201925">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>household</i> is not a reference to the building, but to the people who lived within it (L&amp;N 10.8).</p></p>
<p id="n4201926"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201926">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> Zacchaeus was personally affirmed by Jesus as a descendant (<i>son</i>) <i>of Abraham</i> and a member of God’s family.</p></p>
<p id="n4201927"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201927">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost</i> is Jesus’ mission succinctly defined. See Luke 15:1-32.</p></p>
<p id="n4201928"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201928">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201930"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201930">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The present active infinitive <span class="greek">δοκεῖν</span> (<span class="translit">dokein</span>) has been translated as causal.</p></p>
<p id="n4201931"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201931">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> Luke means here the appearance of the full <i>kingdom of God</i> in power with the Son of Man as judge as Luke 17:22-37 describes.</p></p>
<p id="n4201932"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201932">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “the kingdom of God must appear immediately (see L&amp;N 71.36).</p></p>
<p id="n4201933"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201933">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a man of noble birth” or “a man of noble status” (L&amp;N 87.27).</p></p>
<p id="n4201934"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201934">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note that the receiving of the <i>kingdom</i> takes place in the far country. This suggests that those in the far country recognize and acknowledge the king when his own citizens did not want him as king (v. 14; cf. John 1:11-12).</p></p>
<p id="n4201935"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201935">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> The background to this story about the <i>nobleman</i> who <i>went</i>…<i>to receive for himself a kingdom</i> had some parallels in the area’s recent history: Archelaus was appointed ethnarch of Judea, Samaria, and Idumea in 4 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span>, but the people did not like him. Herod the Great also made a similar journey to Rome where he was crowned King of Judea in 40 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span>, although he was not able to claim his kingdom until 37 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span></p></p>
<p id="n4201936"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201936">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 7:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4201937"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201937">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, one for each. A <i>mina</i> was a Greek monetary unit worth 100 denarii or about four months’ wages for an average worker based on a six-day work week.</p></p>
<p id="n4201938"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201938">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “subjects.” Technically these people were not his subjects yet, but would be upon his return. They were citizens of his country who opposed his appointment as their king; later the newly-appointed king will refer to them as his “enemies” (v. 27).</p></p>
<p id="n4201939"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201939">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect is intense in this context, suggesting an ongoing attitude.</p></p>
<p id="n4201940"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201940">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one” (somewhat derogatory in this context).</p></p>
<p id="n4201941"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201941">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to rule.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201942"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201942">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that when.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201943"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201943">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he said for these slaves to be called to him.” The passive construction has been translated as an active one and simplified to “he summoned.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201944"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201944">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in order that he might know” (a continuation of the preceding sentence). Due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the pronoun “he” as subject and the verb “wanted” to convey the idea of purpose.</p></p>
<p id="n4201945"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201945">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek verb <i>earned</i> refers to profit from engaging in commerce and trade (L&amp;N 57.195). This is an examination of stewardship.</p></p>
<p id="n4201946"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201946">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the royal summons.</p></p>
<p id="n4201947"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201947">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Lord”; or “Master.” (and so throughout this paragraph).</p></p>
<p id="n4201948"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201948">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “minas” in v. 13.</p></p>
<p id="n4201949"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201949">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the nobleman of v. 12, now a king) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201950"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201950">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> See Luke 16:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4201951"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201951">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> The faithful slave received expanded responsibility (<i>authority over ten cities</i>) as a result of his faithfulness; this in turn is an exhortation to faithfulness for the reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4201952"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201952">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201953"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201953">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the second slave’s report.</p></p>
<p id="n4201954"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201954">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the nobleman of v. 12, now a king) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201955"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201955">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> Though ten were given minas, the story stops to focus on the one who did nothing with the opportunity given to him. Here is the parable’s warning about the one who does not trust the master. This figure is called “<i>another</i>,” marking him out as different than the first two.</p></p>
<p id="n4201956"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201956">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “slave” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4201957"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201957">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201958"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201958">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “that I stored away.” L&amp;N 85.53 defines <span class="greek">ἀπόκειμαι</span> (<span class="translit">apokeimai</span>) here as “to put something away for safekeeping—‘to store, to put away in a safe place.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4201959"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201959">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> The piece of cloth, called a <span class="greek">σουδάριον</span> (<span class="translit">soudarion</span>), could have been a towel, napkin, handkerchief, or face cloth (L&amp;N 6.159).</p></p>
<p id="n4201960"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201960">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “exacting,” “harsh,” “hard.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201961"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201961">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “man, taking out.” The Greek word can refer to withdrawing money from a bank (L&amp;N 57.218), and in this context of financial accountability that is the most probable meaning. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the pronoun “you” as subject and translating the participle <span class="greek">αἴρεις</span> (<span class="translit">aireis</span>) as a finite verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4201962"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201962">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek verb <span class="greek">τίθημι</span> (<span class="translit">tithēmi</span>) can be used of depositing money with a banker to earn interest (L&amp;N 57.217). In effect the slave charges that the master takes what he has not earned.</p></p>
<p id="n4201963"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201963">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (the nobleman of v. 12, now a king) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201964"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201964">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “out of your own mouth” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4201965"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201965">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Note the contrast between this slave, described as “wicked,” and the slave in v. 17, described as “good.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201966"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201966">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “exacting,” “harsh,” “hard.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201967"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201967">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “If you really feared me why did you not do a minimum to get what I asked for?”</p></p>
<p id="n4201968"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201968">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on the table”; the idiom refers to a place where money is kept or managed, or credit is established, thus “bank” (L&amp;N 57.215).</p></p>
<p id="n4201969"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201969">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to those standing by,” but in this context involving an audience before the king to give an accounting, these would not be casual bystanders but courtiers or attendants.</p></p>
<p id="n4201970"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201970">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ten minas.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201971"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201971">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context. Those watching the evaluation are shocked, as the one with the most gets even more. The word “already” is supplied at the end of the statement to indicate this surprise and shock.</p></p>
<p id="n4201972"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201972">72</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D W 69 and a few versional witnesses) omit this verse either to harmonize it with Matt 25:28-29 or to keep the king’s speech seamless.</p></p>
<p id="n4201973"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201973">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to everyone who has, he will be given more.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Everyone who has will be given more</i>. Again, faithfulness yields great reward (see Luke 8:18; also Matt 13:12; Mark 4:25).</p></p>
<p id="n4201974"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201974">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> The one who has nothing has even what he seems to have <i>taken away</i> from him, ending up with no reward at all (see also Luke 8:18). The exact force of this is left ambiguous, but there is no comfort here for those who are pictured by the third slave as being totally unmoved by the master. Though not an outright enemy, there is no relationship to the master either. Three groups are represented in the parable: the faithful of various sorts (vv. 16, 18); the unfaithful who associate with Jesus but do not trust him (v. 21); and the enemies (v. 27).</p></p>
<p id="n4201975"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201975">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to rule over them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201976"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201976">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term, when used of people rather than animals, has some connotations of violence and mercilessness (L&amp;N 20.72).</p></p>
<p id="n4201977"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201977">77</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Slaughter them</i>. To reject the king is to face certain judgment from him.</p></p>
<p id="n4201978"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201978">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201979"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201979">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> This could mean “before [his disciples],” but that is slightly more awkward, requiring an elided element (the disciples) to be supplied.</p></p>
<p id="n4201980"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201980">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is yet another travel note on the journey <i>to Jerusalem</i>. See also Luke 18:31; 19:11. Jesus does not actually enter Jerusalem until 19:45.</p></p>
<p id="n4201981"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201981">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that when.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4201982"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201982">82</a> <p><b>sn</b> The exact location of the village of <i>Bethphage</i> is not known. Most locate it on the southeast side of the Mount of Olives and northwest of Bethany, about 1.5 miles (3 km) east of Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n4201983"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201983">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at the mountain called ‘of Olives.’” This form of reference is awkward in contemporary English, so the more familiar “Mount of Olives” has been used in the translation.</p><p><b>sn</b> “Mountain” in English generally denotes a higher elevation than it often does in reference to places in Palestine. The <i>Mount of Olives</i> is really a ridge running north to south about 1.8 mi (3 km) long, east of Jerusalem across the Kidron Valley. Its central elevation is about 100 ft (30 m) higher than Jerusalem. It was named for the large number of olive trees which grew on it.</p></p>
<p id="n4201984"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201984">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201985"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201985">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the village lying before [you]” (BDAG 530 s.v. <span class="greek">κατέναντι</span> 2.a).</p></p>
<p id="n4201986"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201986">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which entering.” This is a continuation of the previous sentence in Greek, but because of the length and complexity of the construction a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201987"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201987">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a colt tied there on which no one of men has ever sat.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201988"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201988">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> The custom called <i>angaria</i> allowed the impressment of animals for service to a significant figure.</p></p>
<p id="n4201989"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201989">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sent ahead and went and found.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201990"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201990">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Exactly as he had told them</i>. Nothing in Luke 19-23 catches Jesus by surprise. Often he directs the action.</p></p>
<p id="n4201991"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201991">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201992"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201992">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201993"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201993">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201994"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201994">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “garments,” but this refers in context to their outer cloaks. The action is like 2 Kgs 9:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4201995"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201995">95</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Zech 9:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4201996"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201996">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although <span class="greek">ἐπεβίβασαν</span> (<span class="translit">epebibasan</span>) is frequently translated “set [Jesus] on it” or “put [Jesus] on it,” when used of a riding animal the verb can mean “to cause to mount” (L&amp;N 15.98); thus here “had Jesus get on it.” The degree of assistance is not specified.</p></p>
<p id="n4201997"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201997">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201998"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201998">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> The disciples initiated this action (since in 19:35 and 37 they are the subject) but the other gospels indicate the crowds also became involved. Thus it is difficult to specify the referent here as “the disciples” or “people.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201999"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n4201999">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the descent of”; this could refer to either the slope of the hillside itself or the path leading down from it (the second option has been adopted for the translation, see L&amp;N 15.109).</p></p>
<p id="n42019100"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019100">100</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the name <i>Mount of Olives</i> in v. 29.</p></p>
<p id="n42019101"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the”; the Greek article has been translated here as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n42019102"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the participle <span class="greek">χαίροντες</span> (<span class="translit">chairontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb in English; it could also be translated adverbially as a participle of manner: “began to praise God joyfully.”</p></p>
<p id="n42019103"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019103">103</a> <p><b>sn</b> See 2:13, 20; Acts 2:47; 3:8-9.</p></p>
<p id="n42019104"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “works of power,” “miracles.” Jesus’ ministry of miracles is what has drawn attention. See Luke 7:22.</p></p>
<p id="n42019105"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they had seen, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42019106"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019106">106</a> <p><b>sn</b> Luke adds the title <i>king</i> to the citation from Ps 118:26 to make clear who was meant (see Luke 18:38). The psalm was used in looking for the deliverance of the end, thus leading to the Pharisees’ reaction.</p></p>
<p id="n42019107"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 118:26.</p></p>
<p id="n42019108"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context. Not all present are willing to join in the acclamation.</p></p>
<p id="n42019109"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019109">109</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n42019110"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019110">110</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Teacher, rebuke your disciples</i>. The Pharisees were complaining that the claims were too great.</p></p>
<p id="n42019111"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and answering, he said.” This has been simplified in the translation to “He answered.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42019112"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these.”</p></p>
<p id="n42019113"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019113">113</a> <p><b>sn</b> This statement amounts to a rebuke. The idiom of creation speaking means that even creation knows what is taking place, yet the Pharisees miss it. On this idiom, see Gen 4:10 and Hab 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n42019114"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n42019115"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he.”</p></p>
<p id="n42019116"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019116">116</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>When Jesus approached and saw the city</i>. This is the last travel note in Luke’s account (the so-called Jerusalem journey), as Jesus <i>approached and saw the city</i> before entering it.</p></p>
<p id="n42019117"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019117">117</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>On this day</i>. They had missed the time of Messiah’s coming; see v. 44.</p></p>
<p id="n42019118"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the things toward peace.” This expression seems to mean “the things that would ‘lead to,’ ‘bring about,’ or ‘make for’ peace.”</p></p>
<p id="n42019119"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019119">119</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>But now they are hidden from your eyes</i>. This becomes an oracle of doom in the classic OT sense; see Luke 13:31-35; 11:49-51; Jer 9:2; 13:7; 14:7. They are now blind and under judgment (Jer 15:5; Ps 122:6).</p></p>
<p id="n42019120"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019120">120</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus now predicted the events that would be fulfilled in the fall of Jerusalem in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 70. The details of the siege have led some to see Luke writing this after Jerusalem’s fall, but the language of the verse is like God’s exilic judgment for covenant unfaithfulness (Hab 2:8; Jer 6:6, 14; 8:13-22; 9:1; Ezek 4:2; 26:8; Isa 29:1-4). Specific details are lacking and the procedures described (<i>build an embankment against you</i>) were standard Roman military tactics.</p></p>
<p id="n42019121"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019121">121</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>An embankment</i> refers to either wooden barricades or earthworks, or a combination of the two.</p></p>
<p id="n42019122"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They will raze you to the ground.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The singular pronoun <i>you</i> refers to the city of Jerusalem personified.</p></p>
<p id="n42019123"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “your children within you.” The phrase “[your] walls” has been supplied in the translation to clarify that the city of Jerusalem, metaphorically pictured as an individual, is spoken of here.</p></p>
<p id="n42019124"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019124">124</a> <p><b>sn</b> (Not) <i>one stone on top of another</i> is an idiom for total destruction.</p></p>
<p id="n42019125"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “leave stone on stone.”</p></p>
<p id="n42019126"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the time of your visitation.” To clarify what this refers to, the words “from God” are supplied at the end of the verse, although they do not occur in the Greek text.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>You did not recognize the time of your visitation</i> refers to the time God came to visit them. They had missed the Messiah; see Luke 1:68-79.</p></p>
<p id="n42019127"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42019128"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he.” </p></p>
<p id="n42019129"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple” (also in v. 47).</p><p><b>sn</b> The merchants (<i>those who were selling things there</i>) would have been located in the Court of the Gentiles.</p></p>
<p id="n42019130"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019130">130</a> <p><b>sn</b> Matthew (21:12-27), Mark (11:15-19) and Luke (here, 19:45-46) record this incident of the temple cleansing at the end of Jesus’ ministry. John (2:13-16) records a cleansing of the temple at the beginning of Jesus’ ministry. See the note on the word <i>temple courts</i> in John 2:14 for a discussion of the relationship of these accounts to one another.</p></p>
<p id="n42019131"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019131">131</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 56:7.</p></p>
<p id="n42019132"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a hideout” (see L&amp;N 1.57).</p></p>
<p id="n42019133"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019133">133</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Jer 7:11. The meaning of Jesus’ statement about making the temple courts <i>a den of robbers</i> probably operates here at two levels. Not only were the religious leaders robbing the people financially, but because of this they had also robbed them spiritually by stealing from them the opportunity to come to know God genuinely. It is possible that these merchants had recently been moved to this location for convenience.</p></p>
<p id="n42019134"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42019135"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n42019136"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to destroy.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The action at the temple was the last straw. In their view, if Jesus could cause trouble in the holy place, then he must be stopped, so the leaders were <i>seeking to assassinate him</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n42019137"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n42019138"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they did not find the thing that they might do.”</p></p>
<p id="n42019139"><a href="file1034.xhtml#n42019139">139</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>All the people hung on his words</i> is an idiom for intent, eager listening. Jesus’ popularity and support made it unwise for the leadership to seize him.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
