<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 25</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 25</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Ten Virgins</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:1</span> “At that time the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. <span class="verse">25:2</span> Five<sup><a id="n400251" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n400251">1</a></sup> of the virgins<sup><a id="n400252" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n400252">2</a></sup> were foolish, and five were wise. <span class="verse">25:3</span> When<sup><a id="n400253" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n400253">3</a></sup> the foolish ones took their lamps, they did not take extra<sup><a id="n400254" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n400254">4</a></sup> olive oil<sup><a id="n400255" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n400255">5</a></sup> with them. <span class="verse">25:4</span> But the wise ones took flasks of olive oil with their lamps. <span class="verse">25:5</span> When<sup><a id="n400256" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n400256">6</a></sup> the bridegroom was delayed a long time, they all became drowsy and fell asleep. <span class="verse">25:6</span> But at midnight there was a shout, ‘Look, the bridegroom is here! Come out to meet him.’ <span class="verse">25:7</span> Then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps. <span class="verse">25:8</span> The<sup><a id="n400257" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n400257">7</a></sup> foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are going out.’ <span class="verse">25:9</span> ‘No,’ they replied.<sup><a id="n400258" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n400258">8</a></sup> ‘There won’t be enough for you and for us. Go instead to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.’ <span class="verse">25:10</span> But while they had gone to buy it, the bridegroom arrived, and those who were ready went inside with him to the wedding banquet. Then<sup><a id="n400259" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n400259">9</a></sup> the door was shut. <span class="verse">25:11</span> Later,<sup><a id="n4002510" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002510">10</a></sup> the other virgins came too, saying, ‘Lord, lord! Let us in!’<sup><a id="n4002511" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002511">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">25:12</span> But he replied,<sup><a id="n4002512" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002512">12</a></sup> ‘I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4002513" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002513">13</a></sup> I do not know you!’ <span class="verse">25:13</span> Therefore stay alert, because you do not know the day or the hour.<sup><a id="n4002514" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002514">14</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Parable of the Talents </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:14</span> “For it is like a man going on a journey, who summoned his slaves<sup><a id="n4002515" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002515">15</a></sup> and entrusted his property to them. <span class="verse">25:15</span> To<sup><a id="n4002516" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002516">16</a></sup> one he gave five talents,<sup><a id="n4002517" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002517">17</a></sup> to another two, and to another one, each according to his ability. Then he went on his journey. <span class="verse">25:16</span> The one who had received five talents went off right away and put his money to work<sup><a id="n4002518" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002518">18</a></sup> and gained five more. <span class="verse">25:17</span> In the same way, the one who had two gained two more. <span class="verse">25:18</span> But the one who had received one talent went out and dug a hole in the ground and hid his master’s money in it. <span class="verse">25:19</span> After<sup><a id="n4002519" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002519">19</a></sup> a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled his accounts with them. <span class="verse">25:20</span> The<sup><a id="n4002520" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002520">20</a></sup> one who had received the five talents came and brought five more, saying, ‘Sir,<sup><a id="n4002521" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002521">21</a></sup> you entrusted me with five talents. See, I have gained five more.’ <span class="verse">25:21</span> His master answered,<sup><a id="n4002522" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002522">22</a></sup> ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You have been faithful in a few things. I will put you in charge of many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <span class="verse">25:22</span> The<sup><a id="n4002523" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002523">23</a></sup> one with the two talents also came and said, ‘Sir, you entrusted two talents to me. See, I have gained two more.’ <span class="verse">25:23</span> His master answered, ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You have been faithful with a few things. I will put you in charge of many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <span class="verse">25:24</span> Then the one who had received the one talent came and said, ‘Sir, I knew that you were a hard man, harvesting where you did not sow, and gathering where you did not scatter seed, <span class="verse">25:25</span> so<sup><a id="n4002524" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002524">24</a></sup> I was afraid, and I went and hid your talent in the ground. See, you have what is yours.’ <span class="verse">25:26</span> But his master answered,<sup><a id="n4002525" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002525">25</a></sup> ‘Evil and lazy slave! So you knew that I harvest where I didn’t sow and gather where I didn’t scatter? <span class="verse">25:27</span> Then you should have deposited my money with the bankers,<sup><a id="n4002526" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002526">26</a></sup> and on my return I would have received my money back with interest!<sup><a id="n4002527" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002527">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">25:28</span> Therefore take the talent from him and give it to the one who has ten.<sup><a id="n4002528" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002528">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">25:29</span> For the one who has will be given more,<sup><a id="n4002529" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002529">29</a></sup> and he will have more than enough. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.<sup><a id="n4002530" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002530">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">25:30</span> And throw that worthless slave into the outer darkness,<sup><a id="n4002531" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002531">31</a></sup> where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’ </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Judgment</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:31</span> “When<sup><a id="n4002532" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002532">32</a></sup> the Son of Man comes in his glory and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne. <span class="verse">25:32</span> All<sup><a id="n4002533" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002533">33</a></sup> the nations will be assembled before him, and he will separate people one from another like a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. <span class="verse">25:33</span> He<sup><a id="n4002534" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002534">34</a></sup> will put the sheep on his right and the goats on his left. <span class="verse">25:34</span> Then the king will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. <span class="verse">25:35</span> For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you invited me in, <span class="verse">25:36</span> I was naked and you gave me clothing, I was sick and you took care of me, I was in prison and you visited me.’ <span class="verse">25:37</span> Then the righteous will answer him,<sup><a id="n4002535" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002535">35</a></sup> ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink? <span class="verse">25:38</span> When<sup><a id="n4002536" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002536">36</a></sup> did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or naked and clothe you? <span class="verse">25:39</span> When<sup><a id="n4002537" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002537">37</a></sup> did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’ <span class="verse">25:40</span> And the king will answer them,<sup><a id="n4002538" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002538">38</a></sup> ‘I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4002539" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002539">39</a></sup> just as you did it for one of the least of these brothers or sisters<sup><a id="n4002540" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002540">40</a></sup> of mine, you did it for me.’ </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">25:41</span> “Then he will say<sup><a id="n4002541" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002541">41</a></sup> to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you accursed, into the eternal fire that has been prepared for the devil and his angels! <span class="verse">25:42</span> For I was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink. <span class="verse">25:43</span> I was a stranger and you did not receive me as a guest, naked and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison and you did not visit me.’ <span class="verse">25:44</span> Then they too will answer,<sup><a id="n4002542" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002542">42</a></sup> ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not give you whatever you needed?’ <span class="verse">25:45</span> Then he will answer them,<sup><a id="n4002543" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002543">43</a></sup> ‘I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4002544" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002544">44</a></sup> just as you did not do it for one of the least of these, you did not do it for me.’ <span class="verse">25:46</span> And these will depart into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.”<sup><a id="n4002545" href="file994_notes.xhtml#n4002545">45</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>