<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Hebrews 11</h2>
<p id="n580111"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n580111">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the elders,” “the ancients.”</p></p>
<p id="n580112"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n580112">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “were attested,” “received commendation”; and Heb 11:4-6 shows this to be from God.</p></p>
<p id="n580113"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n580113">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ages.” The temporal (ages) came to be used of the spatial (what exists in those time periods). See Heb 1:2 for same usage.</p></p>
<p id="n580114"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n580114">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by God’s word.”</p></p>
<p id="n580115"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n580115">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek phrasing emphasizes this point by negating the opposite: “so that what is seen did not come into being from things that are visible.”</p></p>
<p id="n580116"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n580116">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “through his sacrifice”; <i>Grk</i> “through which.”</p></p>
<p id="n580117"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n580117">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “through his sacrifice”; <i>Grk</i> “through it.”</p></p>
<p id="n580118"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n580118">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Cf. BDAG 407 s.v. <span class="greek">εὐλαβέομαι</span> 2, “out of reverent regard (for God’s command).”</p></p>
<p id="n580119"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n580119">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “settled as a resident alien.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801110"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “heirs with him.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801111"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that has foundations.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801112"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “past the time of maturity.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801113"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “power to deposit seed.” Though it is not as likely, some construe this phrase to mean “power to conceive seed,” making the whole verse about Sarah: “by faith, even though Sarah herself was barren and too old, she received ability to conceive, because she regarded the one who had given the promise to be trustworthy.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801114"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these”; in the translation the referent (children) has been specified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5801115"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> a collective “the sand.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801116"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801116">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Gen 22:17 (which itself goes back to Gen 15:5). </p></p>
<p id="n5801117"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the promises,” referring to the things God promised, not to the pledges themselves.</p></p>
<p id="n5801118"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sojourners.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801119"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “now.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801120"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here “received the promises” refers to the pledges themselves, not to the things God promised.</p></p>
<p id="n5801121"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he was offering up.” The tense of this verb indicates the attempt or readiness to sacrifice Isaac without the actual completion of the deed.</p></p>
<p id="n5801122"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in Isaac seed will be named for you.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 21:12.</p></p>
<p id="n5801123"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having reasoned,” continuing the ideas of v. 17.</p></p>
<p id="n5801124"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in/by a symbol.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801125"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “worshiped on the top of his staff,” a quotation from Gen 47:31 (LXX).</p></p>
<p id="n5801126"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “coming to an end,” “dying.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801127"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801127">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> Joseph’s prophecy about <i>the exodus of the sons of Israel</i> is found in Gen 50:24.</p></p>
<p id="n5801128"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about his bones,” which refers by metonymy to the disposition of his bones, i.e., his burial.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>instructions about his burial</i> are recorded in Gen 50:25.</p></p>
<p id="n5801129"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Moses, when he was born, was hidden by his parents.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801130"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the abuse [or ‘reproach’] of Christ.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801131"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he was looking away to.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801132"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the pouring out of the blood.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The sprinkling of the blood</i> refers here to the application of the blood to the doorways of the Israelite houses (cf. Exod 12:7, 13).</p></p>
<p id="n5801134"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “after they had been encircled.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801135"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “did not perish together with.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801136"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> This probably refers to the righteous rule of David and others. But it could be more general and mean “did what was righteous.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801137"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “obtained promises,” referring to the things God promised, not to the pledges themselves. </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Gained what was promised</i>. They saw some of God’s promises fulfilled, even though the central promise remained unfulfilled until Christ came (cf. vv. 39-40).</p></p>
<p id="n5801138"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “quenched the power of fire.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801139"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801139">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “recovered from sickness.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801140"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “received back their dead from resurrection.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801141"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to obtain a better resurrection.”</p></p>
<p id="n5801142"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801142">42</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading <span class="greek">ἐπρίσθησαν</span> (<span class="translit">epristhēsan</span>, “they were sawed apart”) is found in some significant witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> [D* twice reads <span class="greek">ἐπίρσθησαν</span>, “they were burned”?] sy<sup>p</sup> sa Or<sup>pt</sup> Eus). Other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have <span class="greek">ἐπειράσθησαν</span> (<span class="translit">epeirasthēsan</span>, “they were tempted”), either before “sawed apart” ([<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>] L P [048] 33 81 326 1505 sy<sup>h</sup>), after “sawed apart” (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>13vid</sup> A D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat bo Or<sup>pt</sup>), or altogether in place of “sawed apart” (0150 vg<sup>mss</sup> Cl). Since the two words <span class="greek">ἐπρίσθησαν</span> and <span class="greek">ἐπειράσθησαν</span> are so much alike in sight and sound, and since the position of “they were tempted” varies in the <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, it seems best to say that <span class="greek">ἐπειράσθησαν</span> is an accidental transcriptional error of <span class="greek">ἐπρίσθησαν</span> or an intentional change to a more common word (the root of <span class="greek">ἐπρίσθησαν</span> [<span class="greek">πρίζω</span>, <span class="translit">prizō</span>] occurs only here in the NT, while the root of <span class="greek">ἐπειράσθησαν</span> [<span class="greek">πειράζω</span>, <span class="translit">peirazō</span>] occurs 38 times). The best reading here seems to be “sawed apart” without any addition before or after. (See <i>TCGNT</i> 603-4, for a discussion of emendations that scholars have proposed for this difficult problem.)</p></p>
<p id="n5801143"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801143">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>these all were commended</i> forms an <i>inclusio</i> with Heb 11:2: The chapter begins and ends with references to commendation for faith.</p></p>
<p id="n5801144"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the promise,” referring to the thing God promised, not to the pledge itself.</p></p>
<p id="n5801145"><a href="file1202.xhtml#n5801145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek phrasing emphasizes this point by negating the opposite: “so that they would not be made perfect without us.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
