<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 1</h2>
<p id="n400011"><a href="file970.xhtml#n400011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the book of the genealogy.” The noun <span class="greek">βίβλος</span> (<span class="translit">biblos</span>), though it is without the article, is to be translated as definite due to Apollonius’ corollary and the normal use of anarthrous nouns in titles.</p></p>
<p id="n400012"><a href="file970.xhtml#n400012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fathered.”</p></p>
<p id="n400013"><a href="file970.xhtml#n400013">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>By the wife of Uriah</i>, i.e., Bathsheba (cf. 2 Sam 11:3).</p></p>
<p id="n400014"><a href="file970.xhtml#n400014">4</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading <span class="greek">᾿Ασάφ</span> (<span class="translit">Asaph</span>), a variant spelling on <span class="greek">᾿Ασά</span> (<span class="translit">Asa</span>), is found in the earliest and most widespread witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>1vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C [D<sup>luc</sup>] ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 700 it co). Although Asaph was a psalmist and Asa was a king, it is doubtful that the author mistook one for the other since other ancient documents have variant spellings on the king’s name (such as “Asab,” “Asanos,” and “Asaph”). Thus the spelling <span class="greek">᾿Ασάφ</span> that is almost surely found in the initial text of Matt 1:7-8 has been translated as “Asa” in keeping with the more common spelling of the king’s name.</p></p>
<p id="n400015"><a href="file970.xhtml#n400015">5</a> <p><b>tc</b> <span class="greek">᾿Αμώς</span> (<span class="translit">Amōs</span>) is the reading found in the earliest and best witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C [D<sup>luc</sup>] <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 it sa bo), and as such is most likely autographic. This is a variant spelling of the name <span class="greek">᾿Αμών</span> (<span class="translit">Amōn</span>). The translation uses this more well-known spelling “Amon” which is found in the Hebrew MT and the majority of LXX <span class="smcaps">mss</span>. See also the textual discussion of “Asa” versus “Asaph” (vv. 7-8); the situation is similar.</p></p>
<p id="n400016"><a href="file970.xhtml#n400016">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> Before the mention of <i>Jeconiah</i>, several medieval <span class="smcaps">mss</span> add Jehoiakim, in conformity with the genealogy in 1 Chr 3:15-16. But this alters the count of fourteen generations mentioned by the author of Matthew in v. 17. It is evident that the author is selective in his genealogy for a theological purpose.</p></p>
<p id="n400017"><a href="file970.xhtml#n400017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the difference between Greek style, which usually begins a sentence with a conjunction, and English style, which generally does not, the conjunction <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n400018"><a href="file970.xhtml#n400018">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek text and the KJV read <i>Salathiel</i>. Most modern English translations use the OT form of the name (cf. Ezra 3:2).</p></p>
<p id="n400019"><a href="file970.xhtml#n400019">9</a> <p><b>tc</b> There are three significant variant readings at this point in the text. Some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> and versional witnesses (<span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> it) read, “Joseph, to whom the virgin Mary, being betrothed, bore Jesus, who is called Christ.” This reading makes even more explicit than the feminine pronoun (see <b>sn</b> below) the virginal conception of Jesus and as such seems to be a motivated reading. The Sinaitic Syriac ms alone indicates that Joseph was the father of Jesus (“Joseph, to whom was betrothed Mary the virgin, fathered Jesus who is called the Christ”). Although much discussed, this reading has not been found in any Greek witnesses. B. M. Metzger suggests that it was produced by a careless scribe who simply reproduced the set formula of the preceding lines in the genealogy (<i>TCGNT</i> 6). In all likelihood, the two competing variants were thus produced by intentional and unintentional scribal alterations respectively. The reading adopted in the translation has overwhelming support from a variety of witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup><span class="greek">1</span></sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C L W <span class="greek">Γ</span> [ƒ<sup>1</sup>] 33 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> co), and therefore should be regarded as authentic. For a detailed discussion of this textual problem, see <i>TCGNT</i> 2-6.</p><p><b>sn</b> The pronoun <i>whom</i> is feminine gender in the Greek text, referring to Mary.</p></p>
<p id="n4000110"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The term <span class="greek">χριστός</span> (<span class="translit">christos</span>) was originally an adjective (“anointed”), developing in the LXX (the Greek translation of the OT known as the Septuagint) into a substantive (“an anointed one”), then developing still further into a technical generic term (“the anointed one”). In the intertestamental period it developed further into a technical term referring to the hoped-for anointed one, that is, a specific individual. In the NT the development starts there (technical-specific), is so used in the gospels, and then develops in Paul’s letters to mean virtually Jesus’ last name.</p></p>
<p id="n4000111"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4000112"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The connotation of the Greek is “before they came together in marital and domestic union” (so BDAG 970 s.v. <span class="greek">συνέρχομαι</span> 3). </p></p>
<p id="n4000113"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “husband.” See following note for discussion.</p></p>
<p id="n4000114"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “send her away.”</p><p><b>sn</b> In the Jewish context, “full betrothal was so binding that its breaking required a certificate of divorce, and the death of one party made the other a widow or widower (<i>m. Ketub</i>. 1:2; <i>m. Sota</i> 1:5; <i>m. Git</i>. passim…)” (R. H. Gundry, <i>Matthew: A Commentary on his Literary and Theological Art</i>, 21).</p></p>
<p id="n4000115"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold, an angel.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4000116"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the angel of the Lord.” Linguistically, “angel of the Lord” is the same in both testaments (and thus, he is either “an angel of the Lord” or “the angel of the Lord” in both testaments). For arguments and implications, see <i>ExSyn</i> 252; M. J. Davidson, “Angels,” <i>DJG</i>, 9; W. G. MacDonald argues for “an angel” in both testaments: “Christology and ‘The Angel of the Lord’,” <i>Current Issues in Biblical and Patristic Interpretation</i>, 324-35.</p></p>
<p id="n4000117"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you will call his name.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000118"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000118">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek form of the name <span class="translit">Iēsous</span>, which was translated into Latin as <i>Jesus</i>, is the same as the Hebrew <span class="translit">Yeshua</span> (Joshua), which means “Yahweh saves” (“Yahweh” is typically rendered as “Lord” in the OT). It was a fairly common name among Jews in 1st century Judea and Galilee, as references to a number of people by this name in the LXX and Josephus indicate.</p></p>
<p id="n4000119"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they will call his name.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000120"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000120">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 7:14. It is unclear whether the author is citing the MT or the LXX. The use of the word <span class="greek">παρθένος</span> (<span class="translit">parthenos</span>, “virgin”) may be due to its occurrence in the LXX, but it is also possible that it is the author’s translation of the Hebrew term <span class="hebrew">&#8207;עַלְמָה&#8206;</span> (<span class="translit">’almah</span>, “young woman”). The second phrase of the quotation is modified slightly from its original context; both the MT and LXX have a second person singular verb, but here the quotation has a third person plural verb form. The spelling of the name here (<i>Emmanuel</i>) differs from the spelling of the name in the OT (<i>Immanuel</i>) because of a different leading vowel in the respective Greek and Hebrew words. In the original context, this passage pointed to a child who would be born during the time of Ahaz as proof that the military alliance of Syria and Israel against Judah would fail. Within Isaiah’s subsequent prophecies this promise was ultimately applied to the future Davidic king who would one day rule over the nation.</p></p>
<p id="n4000121"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is translated.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000122"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000122">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 7:14; 8:8, 10. The Hebrew name <i>Emmanuel</i> literally means “God (is) with us.” This phrase occurs three times in the OT in close proximity, and subsequent uses are likely related to preceding ones. Thus it is very likely the present author had each in mind when he defined the name in v. 23.</p></p>
<p id="n4000123"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “Lord” in 1:20. Here the translation “the angel of the Lord” is used because the Greek article (<span class="greek">ὁ</span>, <span class="translit">ho</span>) which precedes <span class="greek">ἄγγελος</span> (<span class="translit">angelos</span>) is taken as an anaphoric article (<i>ExSyn</i> 217-19) referring back to the angel mentioned in v. 20.</p></p>
<p id="n4000124"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “did not have sexual relations”; <i>Grk</i> “was not knowing her.” The verb “know” (in both Hebrew and Greek) is a frequent biblical euphemism for sexual relations. However, a translation like “did not have sexual relations with her” was considered too graphic in light of the popularity and wide use of Matthew’s infancy narrative. Thus the somewhat less direct but still clear “did not have marital relations” was preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4000125"><a href="file970.xhtml#n4000125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he called his name Jesus.” The coordinate clause has been translated as a relative clause in English for stylistic reasons.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
