<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 3</h2>
<p id="n440031"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n440031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n440032"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n440032">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Going up to the temple at the time for prayer</i>. The earliest Christians, being of Jewish roots, were still participating in the institutions of Judaism at this point. Their faith in Christ did not make them non-Jewish in their practices.</p></p>
<p id="n440033"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n440033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at the ninth hour.” This is calculated from sunrise (Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 14.4.3 [14.65]; Dan 9:21).</p></p>
<p id="n440034"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n440034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “crippled.”</p></p>
<p id="n440035"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n440035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from his mother’s womb.”</p></p>
<p id="n440036"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n440036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 437 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡμέρα</span> 2.c has “<i>every day</i>” for this phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n440037"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n440037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “alms.” The term “alms” is not in common use today, so what the man expected, “money,” is used in the translation instead. The idea is that of money given as a gift to someone who was poor. Giving alms was viewed as honorable in Judaism (Tob 1:3, 16; 12:8-9; <i>m. Pe’ah</i> 1:1). See also Luke 11:41; 12:33; Acts 9:36; 10:2, 4, 31; 24:17.</p></p>
<p id="n440038"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n440038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.” This is actually a reference to the courts surrounding the temple proper, and has been translated accordingly.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Into the temple courts</i>. The exact location of this incident is debated. The ‘Beautiful Gate’ referred either to the Nicanor Gate (which led from the Court of the Gentiles into the Court of Women) or the Shushan Gate at the eastern wall.</p></p>
<p id="n440039"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n440039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.” This is actually a reference to the courts surrounding the temple proper, and has been translated accordingly.</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on the phrase <i>the temple courts</i> in the previous verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4400310"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “alms.” See the note on the word “money” in the previous verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4400311"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Peter, looking directly at him, as did John, said.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀτενίσας</span> (<span class="translit">atenisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400312"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So he”; the referent (the lame man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400313"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I have no money.” L&amp;N 6.69 classifies the expression <span class="greek">ἀργύριον καὶ χρυσίον</span> (<span class="translit">argurion kai chrusion</span>) as an idiom that is a generic expression for currency, thus “money.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400314"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400314">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>In the name</i>. Note the authority <i>in the name</i> of Jesus the Messiah. His presence and power are at work for the man. The reference to “the name” is not like a magical incantation, but is designed to indicate the agent who performs the healing. The theme is quite frequent in Acts (2:38 plus 21 other times).</p></p>
<p id="n4400315"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400316"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400316">16</a> <p><b>tc</b> The words “stand up and” (<span class="greek">ἔγειρε καί</span>, <span class="translit">egeire kai</span>) are not in a few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D sa), but are included in A C E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 095 33 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy mae bo. The external testimony is thus fairly evenly divided, with few but signficant representatives of the Alexandrian and Western textual clusters supporting the shorter reading. Internally, the words look like a standard scribal emendation, and may have been motivated by other healing passages where Jesus gave a similar double command (cf. Matt 9:5; Mark 2:9, [11]; Luke 5:23; [6:8]; John 5:8). On the other hand, there is some motivation for deleting <span class="greek">ἔγειρε καί</span> here, namely, unlike Jesus’ healing miracles, Peter raises (<span class="greek">ἤγειρεν</span>, <span class="translit">ēgeiren</span>) the man to his feet (v. 7) rather than the man rising on his own. In light of the scribal tendency to harmonize, especially in immediate context, the longer reading is slightly preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4400317"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then” to reflect the sequence of events.</p></p>
<p id="n4400318"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Peter) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400319"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Peter taking hold of him…raised him up.” The participle <span class="greek">πιάσας</span> (<span class="translit">piasas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400320"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (the man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400321"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400321">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>At once the man’s feet and ankles were made strong</i>. Note that despite the past lameness, the man is immediately able to walk. The restoration of his ability to walk pictures the presence of a renewed walk, a fresh start at life; this was far more than money would have given him.</p></p>
<p id="n4400322"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun.</p></p>
<p id="n4400323"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jumping up, he stood.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐξαλλόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">exallomenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. It is possible that the paralyzed man actually jumped off the ground, but more probably this term simply refers to the speed with which he stood up. See L&amp;N 15.240.</p></p>
<p id="n4400324"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.” This is actually a reference to the courts surrounding the temple proper, and has been translated accordingly.</p></p>
<p id="n4400325"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And all.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400326"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “alms,” but this term is not in common use today, so the closest modern equivalent, “donations,” is used instead. The idea is that of a donation to charity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400327"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400327">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Amazement</i> is a frequent response to miracles of Jesus or the apostles. These took the ancients by as much surprise as they would people today. But in terms of response to what God is doing, amazement does not equal faith (Luke 4:36; 5:9, 26; 7:16).</p></p>
<p id="n4400328"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400328">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400329"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “portico,” “colonnade”; <i>Grk</i> “stoa.” The translation “covered walkway” (a descriptive translation) was used here because the architectural term “portico” or “colonnade” is less familiar. However, the more technical term “portico” was retained in the actual name that follows.</p></p>
<p id="n4400330"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400330">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Solomon</i>’<i>s Portico</i> was a covered walkway formed by rows of columns supporting a roof and open on the inner side facing the center of the temple complex. It was located on the east side of the temple (Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 15.11.3-5 [15.391-420], 20.9.7 [20.221]) and was a place of commerce and conversation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400331"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400331">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “People of Israel,” since this was taking place in Solomon’s Portico and women may have been present. The Greek <span class="greek">ἄνδρες ᾿Ισραηλῖται</span> (<span class="translit">andres Israēlitai</span>) used in the plural would normally mean “men, gentlemen” (BDAG 79 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> 1.a).</p></p>
<p id="n4400332"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400332">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “or why.” </p></p>
<p id="n4400333"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400333">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (the man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400334"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400334">34</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The repetition of <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span> (<span class="translit">ho theos</span>, “God”) before the names of Isaac and Jacob is found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C (A D without article) 36 104 1175 lat. The omission of the second and third <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span> is supported by B E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span>. The other time that Exod 3:6 is quoted in Acts (7:32) the best witnesses also lack the repeated <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span>, but the three other times this OT passage is quoted in the NT the full form, with the thrice-mentioned <span class="greek">θεός</span>, is used (Matt 22:32; Mark 12:26; Luke 20:37). Scribes would be prone to conform the wording here to the LXX; the longer reading is thus most likely not authentic. NA<sup>28</sup> has the words in brackets, indicating doubts as to their authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400335"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400335">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “ancestors”; <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The reference to the God of the patriarchs is a reminder that God is the God of the nation and of promises. The phrase <i>God of our forefathers</i> is from the Hebrew scriptures (Exod 3:6, 15-16; 4:5; see also the Jewish prayer known as “The Eighteen Benedictions”). Once again, event has led to explanation, or what is called the “sign and speech” pattern.</p></p>
<p id="n4400336"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400336">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Has glorified</i>. Jesus is alive, raised and active, as the healing illustrates so dramatically how God honors him.</p></p>
<p id="n4400337"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400337">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>His servant</i>. The term <i>servant</i> has messianic connotations given the context of the promise, the note of suffering, and the titles and functions noted in vv. 14-15.</p></p>
<p id="n4400338"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400338">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “denied,” “disowned.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400339"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400339">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> This genitive absolute construction could be understood as temporal (“when he had decided”) or concessive (“although he had decided”).</p></p>
<p id="n4400340"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400340">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “denied,” “disowned.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400341"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400341">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “You put to death.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400342"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400342">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Founder,” “founding Leader.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400343"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400343">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Whom God raised</i>. God is the main actor here, as he testifies to Jesus and vindicates him.</p></p>
<p id="n4400344"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400344">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whom God raised from the dead, of which we are witnesses.” The two consecutive relative clauses make for awkward English style, so the second was begun as a new sentence with the words “to this fact” supplied in place of the Greek relative pronoun to make a complete sentence in English.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>We are witnesses</i>. Note the two <i>witnesses</i> here, Peter and John (Acts 5:32; Heb 2:3-4).</p></p>
<p id="n4400345"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400345">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in his name”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. </p></p>
<p id="n4400346"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400346">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here is another example of appeal to the person by mentioning the name. See the note on the word <i>name</i> in 3:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4400347"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400347">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “see and know, and the faith.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation and <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4400348"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400348">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The faith that is through Jesus</i>. Note how this verse explains how the claim to “faith in Jesus’ name” works and what it means. To appeal to the name is to point to the person. It is not clear that the man expressed faith before the miracle. This could well be a “grace-faith miracle” where God grants power through the apostles to picture how much a gift life is (Luke 17:11-19). Christology and grace are emphasized here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400349"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400349">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in full view.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400350"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400350">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>ignorance</i> Peter mentions here does not excuse them from culpability. It was simply a way to say “you did not realize the great mistake you made.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400351"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400351">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>God foretold</i>. Peter’s topic is the working out of God’s plan and promise through events the scriptures also note.</p></p>
<p id="n4400352"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400352">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the mouth of” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4400353"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400353">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:31.</p></p>
<p id="n4400354"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400354">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “relief.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Times of refreshing</i>. The phrase implies relief from difficult, distressful or burdensome circumstances. It is generally regarded as a reference to the messianic age being ushered in.</p></p>
<p id="n4400355"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400355">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “so that…Lord” are traditionally placed in v. 19 by most English translations, but in the present translation the verse division follows the standard critical editions of the Greek text (NA<sup>28</sup>, UBS<sup>5</sup>).</p></p>
<p id="n4400356"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400356">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Christ”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>He may send the Messiah appointed for you—that is, Jesus</i>. The language points to the expectation of Jesus’ return to gather his people. It is a development of the question raised in Acts 1:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4400357"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400357">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “designated in advance.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400358"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400358">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whom,” continuing the sentence from v. 20. </p></p>
<p id="n4400359"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400359">59</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>must</i> used here (<span class="greek">δεῖ</span>, <span class="translit">dei</span>, “it is necessary”) is a key Lukan term to point to the plan of God and what must occur.</p></p>
<p id="n4400360"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400360">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “until the times of the restoration of all things.” Because of the awkward English style of the extended genitive construction, and because the following relative clause has as its referent the “time of restoration” rather than “all things,” the phrase was translated “until the time all things are restored.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The time all things are restored</i>. What that restoration involves is already recorded in the scriptures of the nation of Israel.</p></p>
<p id="n4400361"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400361">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “spoke.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400362"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400362">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from all ages past.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>From times long ago</i>. Once again, God’s plan is emphasized.</p></p>
<p id="n4400363"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400363">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hear,” but the idea of “hear and obey” or simply “obey” is frequently contained in the Greek verb <span class="greek">ἀκούω</span> (<span class="translit">akouō</span>; see L&amp;N 36.14) and the following context (v. 23) makes it clear that failure to “obey” the words of this “prophet like Moses” will result in complete destruction.</p></p>
<p id="n4400364"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400364">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 18:15. By quoting Deut 18:15 Peter declared that Jesus was the eschatological “<i>prophet like</i> [Moses]” mentioned in that passage, who reveals the plan of God and the way of God.</p></p>
<p id="n4400365"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400365">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “every soul” (here “soul” is an idiom for the whole person).</p></p>
<p id="n4400366"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400366">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will be completely destroyed.” In Acts 3:23 the verb <span class="greek">ἐξολεθρεύω</span> (<span class="translit">exolethreuō</span>) is translated “destroy and remove” by L&amp;N 20.35.</p></p>
<p id="n4400367"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400367">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 18:19, also Lev 23:29. The OT context of Lev 23:29 discusses what happened when one failed to honor atonement. One ignored the required sacrifice of God at one’s peril.</p></p>
<p id="n4400368"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400368">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “proclaimed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>All the prophets…have spoken about and announced</i>. What Peter preaches is rooted in basic biblical and Jewish hope as expressed in the OT scriptures.</p></p>
<p id="n4400369"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400369">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400370"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400370">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in your offspring”; <i>Grk</i> “in your seed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>In your descendants</i> (<i>Grk</i> “in your seed”). <i>Seed</i> has an important ambiguity in this verse. The blessing comes from the servant (v. 26), who in turn blesses the responsive children of the covenant as the scripture promised. Jesus is the seed who blesses the seed.</p></p>
<p id="n4400371"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400371">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “families.” The Greek word <span class="greek">πατριά</span> (<span class="translit">patria</span>) can indicate persons of succeeding generations who are related by birth (“lineage,” “family”) but it can also indicate a relatively large unit of people who make up a sociopolitical group and who share a presumed biological descent. In many contexts <span class="greek">πατριά</span> is very similar to <span class="greek">ἔθνος</span> (<span class="translit">ethnos</span>) and <span class="greek">λαός</span> (<span class="translit">laos</span>). In light of the context of the OT quotation, it is better to translate <span class="greek">πατριά</span> as “nations” here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400372"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400372">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 22:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4400373"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400373">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God raising up his servant, sent him.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναστήσας</span> (<span class="translit">anastēsas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. Some translations (e.g., NIV, NRSV) render this participle as temporal (“when God raised up his servant”).</p></p>
<p id="n4400374"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400374">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> The picture of <i>turning</i> is again seen as the appropriate response to the message. See v. 19 above. In v. 19 it was “turning to,” here it is “turning away from.” The direction of the two metaphors is important.</p></p>
<p id="n4400375"><a href="file1065.xhtml#n4400375">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation of plural <span class="greek">πονηρία</span> (<span class="translit">ponēria</span>) as “iniquities,” see G. Harder, <i>TDNT</i> 6:565. The plural is important, since for Luke turning to Jesus means turning away from sins, not just the sin of rejecting Jesus.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
