<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Philippians 1</h2>
<p id="n500011"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n500011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul.” The word “from” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n500012"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n500012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “servants” or “bondservants.” Though <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) is normally translated “servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. Also, many slaves in the Roman world became slaves through Rome’s subjugation of conquered nations, kidnapping, or by being born into slave households. </p><p><b>sn</b> Undoubtedly the background for the concept of being the Lord’s slave or servant is to be found in the Old Testament scriptures. For a Jew this concept did not connote drudgery, but honor and privilege. It was used of national Israel at times (Isa 43:10), but was especially associated with famous OT personalities, including such great men as Moses (Josh 14:7), David (Ps 89:3; cf. 2 Sam 7:5, 8) and Elijah (2 Kgs 10:10); all these men were “servants (or slaves) of the Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n500014"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n500014">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The overseers</i> (or “church leaders,” L&amp;N 53.71) is another term for the same official position of leadership as the “elder.” This is seen in the interchange of the two terms in Titus 1:6-7 and in Acts 20:17, 28, as well as in the parallels between Titus 1:6-7 and 1 Tim 3:1-7.</p></p>
<p id="n500015"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n500015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Grace to you and peace.”</p></p>
<p id="n500016"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n500016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> This could also be translated “for your every remembrance of me.” See discussion below.</p></p>
<p id="n500017"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n500017">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Your participation</i> (<i>Grk</i> “fellowship”) could refer to Paul rejoicing because of the Philippian converts’ “fellowship” in the gospel along with him, but it is more likely that this refers to their active “participation” with him in the gospel by means of the financial support they sent to Paul on more than one occasion, discussed later in this letter (4:10-19, esp. 4:15-16).</p></p>
<p id="n500018"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n500018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Several alternatives for translating vv. 3-5 are possible: (1) “I thank my God every time <i>I remember you</i>, yes, always in my every prayer for all of you. I pray with joy because of your participation…” (see NAB; also M. Silva, <i>Philippians</i> [BECNT], 43-44; G. D. Fee, <i>Philippians</i> [NICNT], 76-80); (2) “I thank my God because of <i>your every remembrance of me</i>. Always in my every prayer for all of you I pray with joy. [I am grateful] for your participation…” (see Moffatt; also P. T. O’Brien, <i>Philippians</i> [NIGTC], 58-61). Option (1) is quite similar to the translation above, but sees v. 4a as more or less parenthetical. Option (2) is significantly different in that Paul thanks God because the Philippians remember him rather than when he remembers them.</p></p>
<p id="n500019"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n500019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “since I am sure of this very thing.” The verse begins with an adverbial participle that is dependent on the main verb in v. 3 (“I thank”). Paul here gives one reason for his thankfulness.</p></p>
<p id="n5000110"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The referent is clearly God from the overall context of the paragraph and the mention of “the day of Christ Jesus” at the end, which would be redundant if Christ were referred to here.</p></p>
<p id="n5000111"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “among.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000112"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “it” is not in the Greek text but has been supplied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n5000113"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Just as.” The sense here is probably, “So I give thanks (v. 3) <i>just as</i> it is right for me…”</p></p>
<p id="n5000114"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “because you have me in your heart.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000115"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in my bonds.” The meaning “imprisonment” derives from a figurative extension of the literal meaning (“bonds,” “fetters,” “chains”), L&amp;N 37.115.</p></p>
<p id="n5000116"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “God’s” is supplied from the context (v. 2) to clarify the meaning.</p></p>
<p id="n5000117"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” or “fellow Christians” as here (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited).</p></p>
<p id="n5000118"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the advance of the gospel.” The genitive <span class="greek">εὐαγγελίου</span> (<span class="translit">euangeliou</span>) is taken as objective. </p></p>
<p id="n5000119"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that the whole imperial guard.” The <span class="greek">ὥστε</span> (<span class="translit">hōste</span>) clause that begins v. 13 indicates two results of the spread of the gospel: Outsiders know why Paul is imprisoned (v. 13) and believers are emboldened by his imprisonment (v. 14).</p></p>
<p id="n5000120"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000120">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The whole imperial guard</i> (<i>Grk</i> “praetorium”) can refer to the elite troops stationed in Rome or the headquarters of administrators in the provinces (cf. Matt 27:27; Mark 15:16; John 18:28, 33; 19:9; Acts 23:35). In either case a metonymy is involved, with the place (the praetorium) put for those (soldiers or government officials) who were connected with it or stationed in it.</p></p>
<p id="n5000121"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it has become known by the whole imperial guard and all the rest.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000122"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my bonds [are].”</p></p>
<p id="n5000123"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:12.</p></p>
<p id="n5000124"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “most of the brothers and sisters in the Lord, having confidence.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000125"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “even more so.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000126"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000126">26</a> <p><b>tc</b> A number of significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have “of God” after “word.” Although <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou theou</span>) is amply supported in the Alexandrian and Western witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B [D*] P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 048<sup>vid</sup> 075 0278 33 81 1175 1241 2464 <i>al</i> lat co), the omission is difficult to explain as either an intentional deletion or unintentional oversight. To be sure, the pedigree of the witnesses is not nearly as great for the shorter reading (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> D<sup>2</sup> K 1505 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span>), but it explains well the rise of the other reading. Further, it explains the rise of <span class="greek">κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">kuriou</span>, “of the Lord”), the reading of F and G (for if these <span class="smcaps">mss</span> had followed a <i>Vorlage</i> with <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span>, <span class="greek">κυρίου</span> would not have been expected). Further, <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span> is in different locations among the <span class="smcaps">mss</span>; such dislocations are usually signs of scribal additions to the text. Thus, the Byzantine text and a few other witnesses here have the superior reading, and it should be accepted as the <i>Ausgangstext</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n5000127"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “thinking to cause trouble to my bonds.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000128"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “But.” The conjunction <span class="greek">ἀλλά</span> (<span class="translit">alla</span>) may be emphatic or contrastive. If the former, the idea may be that Paul will continue rejoicing because of the proclamation of the gospel or because of his imminent release from prison (v. 19); if the latter, Paul is now turning his attention solely to this second reason to rejoice, viz., that he will soon be released from prison. In this latter view the clause should be translated, “But I will also rejoice since I know…”</p></p>
<p id="n5000129"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “salvation.” Deliverance from prison (i.e., release) is probably what Paul has in view here, although some take this as a reference to his ultimate release from the body, i.e., dying and being with Christ (v. 23).</p><p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>this will turn out for my deliverance</i> may be an echo of Job 13:16 (LXX).</p></p>
<p id="n5000130"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to my eager expectation and hope.” The <span class="greek">κατά</span> (<span class="translit">kata</span>) phrase is taken as governing the following <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) clause (“that I will not be ashamed…”); the idea could be expressed more verbally as “I confidently hope that I will not be ashamed…”</p></p>
<p id="n5000131"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly, “be intimidated, be put to shame.” </p></p>
<p id="n5000132"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whether by life or by death.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000133"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000134"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fruit of work”; the genitive <span class="greek">ἔργου</span> (<span class="translit">ergou</span>) is taken as an attributed genitive in which the head noun, <span class="greek">καρπός</span> (<span class="translit">karpos</span>), functions attributively (cf. <i>ExSyn</i> 89-91).</p></p>
<p id="n5000135"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “what I shall prefer.” The Greek verb <span class="greek">αἱρέω</span> (<span class="translit">haireō</span>) could also mean “choose,” but in this context such a translation is problematic for it suggests that Paul could perhaps choose suicide (cf. L&amp;N 30.86).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>I don’t know what I prefer</i>. Paul is here struggling with what would be most beneficial for both him and the church. He resolves this issue in vv. 24-25.</p></p>
<p id="n5000136"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I am hard-pressed between the two.” Cf. L&amp;N 30.18.</p></p>
<p id="n5000137"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But to remain in the flesh is more necessary for you.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000138"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000139"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000139">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for your progress.” </p></p>
<p id="n5000140"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000140">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul’s confidence in his release from prison (<i>I know that I will remain and continue with all of you</i>) implies that this Roman imprisonment did not end in his death. Hence, there is the likelihood that he experienced a <i>second</i> Roman imprisonment later on (since the belief of the early church was that Paul died under Nero in Rome). If so, then the pastoral letters (1-2 Tim, Titus) could well fit into a life of Paul that goes beyond any descriptions in the book of Acts (which ends with Paul’s first Roman imprisonment). Some have argued that the pastorals cannot be genuine because they cannot fit into the history of Acts. But this view presupposes that Paul’s first Roman imprisonment was also his last.</p></p>
<p id="n5000141"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “your boasting may overflow in Christ Jesus because of me,” or possibly, “your boasting in me may overflow in Christ Jesus.” BDAG 536 s.v. <span class="greek">καύχημα</span> 1 translates the phrase <span class="greek">τὸ καύχημα ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">to kauchēma humōn</span>) in Phil 1:26 as “what you can be proud of.”</p></p>
<p id="n5000142"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “through my coming again to you.” </p></p>
<p id="n5000143"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “live as citizens.” The verb <span class="greek">πολιτεύεσθε</span> (<span class="translit">politeuesthe</span>) connotes the life of a freeman in a free Roman colony.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Conduct yourselves</i> (<i>Grk</i> “live your lives as citizens”). The Philippians lived in a free Roman city, and thus understood from their own experience what it meant to live as citizens. Paul is here picking up on that motif and elevating it to the citizenship of heaven. Cf. 3:20 (<i>our citizenship is in heaven</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n5000144"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the things concerning you, [namely,] that.” The <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) clause is appositional to <span class="greek">τὰ περὶ ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">ta peri humōn</span>) and therefore “the things concerning you” was not translated.</p></p>
<p id="n5000145"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “the faith of the gospel” could mean one of three things: “the faith that is the gospel” (genitive of apposition), “the faith that originates from the gospel” (genitive of source), or “faith in the gospel” (objective genitive).</p></p>
<p id="n5000146"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which is,” continuing the sentence begun in v. 27.</p><p><b>sn</b> The antecedent of the pronoun <i>This</i> is conceptual, most likely referring to the Philippian Christians standing firm for the gospel. Thus, their stand for the gospel is the dual sign of their opponents’ <i>destruction</i> and of their own <i>salvation</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n5000147"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to them.” </p><p><b>sn</b> Paul uses the dative “to them” (translated here as <i>their</i>) to describe the coming destruction of the gospel’s enemies, but the genitive “your” to describe the believers’ coming salvation. The dative accents what will happen <i>to the enemies</i> (called a dative of disadvantage [see <i>ExSyn</i> 143-44]), while the genitive accents what the believers will <i>possess</i> (and, in fact, <i>do already</i> possess, as v. 29 makes clear).</p></p>
<p id="n5000148"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000148">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this.” The pronoun refers back to “a sign”; thus these words have been repeated for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5000149"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For that which is on behalf of Christ has been granted to you—namely, not only to believe in him but also to suffer for him.” The infinitive phrases are epexegetical to the subject, <span class="greek">τὸ ὑπὲρ Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">to huper Christou</span>), which has the force of “the on-behalf-of-Christ thing,” or “the thing on behalf of Christ.” To translate this in English requires a different idiom.</p></p>
<p id="n5000150"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having,” most likely as an instrumental participle. Thus their present struggle is evidence that they have received the <i>gift</i> of suffering.</p></p>
<p id="n5000151"><a href="file1154.xhtml#n5000151">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that you saw in me and now hear [to be] in me.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
