<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 19</h2>
<p id="n660191"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n660191">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Compare the similar phrase in Rev 16:7.</p></p>
<p id="n660192"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n660192">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has punished.” See BDAG 568 s.v. <span class="greek">κρίνω</span> 5.b.<span class="greek">α</span>, describing the OT background which involves both the vindication of the innocent and the punishment of the guilty.</p></p>
<p id="n660193"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n660193">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n660194"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n660194">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from her hand” (referring to her responsibility in causing the blood of God’s followers to be shed).</p></p>
<p id="n660195"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n660195">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660196"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n660196">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “her smoke ascends forever and ever.”</p></p>
<p id="n660197"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n660197">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “creatures fell down.” BDAG 815 s.v. <span class="greek">πίπτω</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span>. has “<i>fall down, throw oneself to the ground</i> as a sign of devotion or humility, before high-ranking persons or divine beings.”</p></p>
<p id="n660198"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n660198">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660199"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n660199">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601910"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “like the voice of a large crowd…saying.” Because of the complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the words “They were.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601911"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601911">11</a> <p><b>tc</b> Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> P 1611 2053 2344 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup> lat) read “the Lord our God” (<span class="greek">κύριος ὁ θεός ἡμῶν</span>, <span class="translit">kurios ho theos hēmōn</span>). Other significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A 1006 1841), however, omit the “our” (<span class="greek">ἡμῶν</span>). Further, certain <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (051 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup>) omit “Lord” (<span class="greek">κύριος</span>), while others (including <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*) change the order of the statement to “God our Lord” (<span class="greek">ὁ θεός ὁ κύριος ἡμῶν</span>). The expression “the Lord God, the All-Powerful” occurs in 6 other places in Revelation (1:8; 4:8; 11:17; 15:3; 16:7; 21:22) and the pronoun “our” is never used. Scribes familiar with the expression in this book, and especially with the frequent <span class="greek">κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ παντοκράτωρ</span> (<span class="translit">kurios ho theos ho pantokratōr</span>; “the Lord God, the All-Powerful”) in the OT Prophets (LXX; cf. Jer 39:19; Hos 12:6; Amos 3:13; 4:13; 5:8, 14, 15, 16, 27; 9:5, 6, 15; Nah 3:5; Zech 10:3), would naturally omit the pronoun. Its presence may have arisen due to liturgical motivations or to conform to the expression “our God” in 19:1, 5, but this seems much less likely than an aversion to using the pronoun here and only here in the Greek Bible in the fuller title <span class="greek">κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ παντοκράτωρ</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n6601912"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601912">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this word BDAG 755 s.v. <span class="greek">παντοκράτωρ</span> states, “the <i>Almighty, All-Powerful, Omnipotent</i> (<i>One</i>) only of God…(<span class="greek">ὁ</span>)<span class="greek"> κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ π</span>.…Rv 1:8; 4:8; 11:17; 15:3; 16:7; 21:22…<span class="greek">κύριος ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν ὁ π</span>. Rv 19:6.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601913"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601913">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb and the next two verbs are hortatory subjunctives (giving exhortations).</p></p>
<p id="n6601914"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601914">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term translated “fine linen,” BDAG 185 s.v. <span class="greek">βύσσινος</span> states, “<i>made of fine linen,</i> subst. <span class="greek">τὸ β</span>. <i>fine linen, linen garment</i>…Rv 18:12…16; 19:8, 14.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601915"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601915">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> This phrase is treated as a parenthetical explanation by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n6601916"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601916">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601917"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601918"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601918">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the angel’s announcement.</p></p>
<p id="n6601919"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I fell down at his feet.” BDAG 815 s.v. <span class="greek">πίπτω</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span>. has “<i>fall down, throw oneself to the ground</i> as a sign of devotion or humility, before high-ranking persons or divine beings.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601920"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601920">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6601921"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601921">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the elliptical expression <span class="greek">ὅρα μή</span> (<span class="translit">hora mē</span>) BDAG 720 s.v. <span class="greek">ὁράω</span> B.2 states: “Elliptically…<span class="greek">ὅρα μή</span> (sc. <span class="greek">ποιήσῃς</span>) <i>watch out! don’t do that!</i> Rv 19:10; 22:9.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601922"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601922">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The lowliness of a slave is emphasized in the Greek text with the emphatic position of <span class="greek">σύνδουλος</span> (<span class="translit">sundoulos</span>). The use of “only” helps to bring this nuance out in English. </p></p>
<p id="n6601923"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601923">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fellow slave.” See the note on the word “servants” in v. 2.</p></p>
<p id="n6601924"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601924">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term “brother” literally refers to family relationships, but here it is used in a broader sense to connote familial relationships within the family of God (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 2.a).</p></p>
<p id="n6601925"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601925">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsou</span>) has been translated as an objective genitive here. A subjective genitive, also possible, would produce the meaning “who hold to what Jesus testifies.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601926"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601926">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601927"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601927">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “and here came” expresses the sense of <span class="greek">καὶ ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">kai idou</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6601928"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601928">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> A new sentence was started in the translation at this point and <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) was not translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601929"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601929">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in righteousness,” but since the context here involves the punishment of the wicked and the vindication of the saints, “justice” was preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n6601930"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601930">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive noun <span class="greek">πυρός</span> (<span class="translit">puros</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive (see also Rev 1:14).</p></p>
<p id="n6601931"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601931">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation of <span class="greek">διάδημα</span> (<span class="translit">diadēma</span>) as “diadem crown” see L&amp;N 6.196.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Diadem crowns</i> were a type of crown used as a symbol of the highest ruling authority in a given area, and thus often associated with kingship.</p></p>
<p id="n6601932"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601932">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “head, having.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6601933"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601933">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although many translations supply a prepositional phrase to specify what the name was written on (“upon Him,” NASB; “on him,” NIV), there is no location for the name specified in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n6601934"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601934">34</a> <p><b>tc</b> It appears that “dipped” (<span class="greek">βεβαμμένον</span>, <span class="translit">bebammenon</span>), supported by several majuscules and other witnesses (A 051 <span class="apparatus">M</span>), is the original reading. Due to the lack of the preposition “in” (<span class="greek">ἐν</span>, <span class="translit">en</span>) after the verb (<span class="greek">βεβαμμένον αἵματι</span>, <span class="translit">bebammenon haimati</span>), and also probably because of literary allusions to Isa 63:3, several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> and versions seem to have changed the text to “sprinkled” (either <span class="greek">ῥεραντισμένον</span> [<span class="translit">rherantismenon</span>] in P 2329 <i>al</i>; <span class="greek">ἐρραντισμένον</span> [<span class="translit">errantismenon</span>] in 1006 1841; <span class="greek">ἐρραμμένον</span> [<span class="translit">errammenon</span>] in 2053 2062; or <span class="greek">ῥεραμμένον</span> [<span class="translit">rherammenon</span>] in 1611; or in one case <span class="greek">περιρεραμμένον</span> [<span class="translit">perirerammenon</span>] in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>[2]</sup>). The reading most likely to give rise to the others is “dipped.”</p><p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “soaked.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601935"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601935">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the name of him is called.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601936"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601936">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601937"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601937">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term translated “fine linen,” BDAG 185 s.v. <span class="greek">βύσσινος</span> states, “<i>made of fine linen,</i> subst. <span class="greek">τὸ β</span>. <i>fine linen, linen garment</i>…Rv 18:12, 16; 19:8, 14.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601938"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601938">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601939"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601939">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601940"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601940">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will shepherd.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601941"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601941">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scepter.” The Greek term <span class="greek">ῥάβδος</span> (<span class="translit">rhabdos</span>) can mean either “rod” or “scepter.” </p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 2:9 (see also Rev 2:27; 12:5).</p></p>
<p id="n6601942"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601942">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He stomps the winepress</i>. See Isa 63:3, where Messiah does this alone (usually several individuals would join in the process), and Rev 14:20.</p></p>
<p id="n6601943"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601943">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive <span class="greek">θυμοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">thumou</span>) has been translated as an attributed genitive. Following BDAG 461 s.v. <span class="greek">θυμός</span> 2, the combination of the genitives of <span class="greek">θυμός</span> (<span class="translit">thumos</span>) and <span class="greek">ὀργή</span> (<span class="translit">orgē</span>) in Rev 16:19 and 19:15 are taken to be a strengthening of the thought as in the OT and Qumran literature (Exod 32:12; Jer 32:37; Lam 2:3; CD 10:9).</p></p>
<p id="n6601944"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601944">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this word BDAG 755 s.v. <span class="greek">παντοκράτωρ</span> states, “the <i>Almighty, All-Powerful, Omnipotent</i> (<i>One</i>) only of God…(<span class="greek">ὁ</span>)<span class="greek"> κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ π</span>.…Rv 1:8; 4:8; 11:17; 15:3; 16:7; 21:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601945"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601945">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601946"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601946">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> The precise significance of <span class="greek">ἐν</span> (<span class="translit">en</span>) here is difficult to determine.</p></p>
<p id="n6601947"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601947">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">μεσουρανήματι</span> (<span class="translit">mesouranēmati</span>) here see L&amp;N 1.10: “high in the sky, midpoint in the sky, directly overhead, straight above in the sky.” The birds mentioned here are carrion birds like vultures, circling high overhead, and now being summoned to feast on the corpses.</p></p>
<p id="n6601948"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601948">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is the same Greek word (<span class="greek">δεῖπνον</span>, <span class="translit">deipnon</span>) used in 19:9.</p></p>
<p id="n6601949"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601949">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clause, insofar as it is related to the first imperative, has the force of an imperative. </p></p>
<p id="n6601950"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601950">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> The idea of eating “your fill” is evident in the context with the use of <span class="greek">χορτάζω</span> (<span class="translit">chortazō</span>) in v. 21.</p></p>
<p id="n6601951"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601951">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “chiliarchs”; normally a <i>chiliarch</i> was a military officer commanding a thousand soldiers, but here probably used of higher-ranking commanders like generals (see L&amp;N 55.15; cf. Rev 6:15).</p></p>
<p id="n6601952"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601952">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6601953"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601953">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601954"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601954">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the introduction of an unexpected development in the account: The opposing armies do not come together in battle; rather the leader of one side is captured.</p></p>
<p id="n6601955"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601955">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> For this meaning see BDAG 342 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐνώπιον</span> 4.b, “<i>by the authority of, on behalf of</i> Rv 13:12, 14; 19:20.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601956"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601956">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “brimstone.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601957"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601957">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601958"><a href="file1252.xhtml#n6601958">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the translation of <span class="greek">ἐχορτάσθησαν</span> (<span class="translit">echortasthēsan</span>) BDAG 1087 s.v. <span class="greek">χορτάζω</span> 1.a states, “of animals, pass. in act. sense <span class="greek">πάντα τὰ ὄρνεα ἐχορτάσθησαν ἐκ τῶν σαρκῶν αὐτῶν</span> <i>all the birds gorged themselves with their flesh</i> Rv 19:21 (cp. TestJud. 21:8).”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
