<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 24</h2>
<p id="n440241"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n440241">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Ananias</i> was in office from <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 47-59.</p></p>
<p id="n440242"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n440242">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term refers to a professional advocate (BDAG 905 s.v. <span class="greek">ῥήτωρ</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n440243"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n440243">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “an attorney, a certain Tertullus.”</p></p>
<p id="n440244"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n440244">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who” (plural). Because in English the relative pronoun “who” could be understood to refer only to the attorney Tertullus and not to the entire group, it has been replaced with the third person plural pronoun “they.” “And” has been supplied to provide the connection to the preceding clause.</p></p>
<p id="n440245"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n440245">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 326 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐμφανίζω</span> 3 has “<span class="greek">ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> τινὶ κατά τινος</span> <i>bring formal charges against someone</i>…Ac 24:1; 25:2.”</p></p>
<p id="n440246"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n440246">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n440247"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n440247">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “began to bring charges, saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n440248"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n440248">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “experienced much peace.”</p></p>
<p id="n440249"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n440249">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “through you” (“rule” is implied).</p></p>
<p id="n4402410"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term is used only once in the NT (a <i>hapax legomenon</i>). It refers to improvements in internal administration (BDAG 251 s.v. <span class="greek">διόρθωμα</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402411"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “being made for this people.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402412"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402412">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> References to peaceful <i>rule</i>, <i>reforms</i>, and the governor’s <i>foresight</i> in the opening address by Tertullus represent an attempt to praise the governor and thus make him favorable to the case. Actual descriptions of his rule portray him as inept (Tacitus, <i>Annals</i> 12.54; Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 2.13.2-7 [2.253-270]).</p></p>
<p id="n4402413"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402413">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Most excellent Felix</i>. See the note on <i>Felix</i> in 23:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4402414"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in every way and everywhere.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402415"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with complete thankfulness.” BDAG 416 s.v. <span class="greek">εὐχαριστία</span> 1 has “<span class="greek">μετὰ πάσης εὐ</span>.…<i>with all gratitude</i> Ac 24:3.” L&amp;N 31.26 has “‘we acknowledge this anywhere and everywhere with complete thankfulness’ Ac 24:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402416"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “may not weary.” BDAG 274 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐγκόπτω</span> states, “<span class="greek">ἵνα μὴ ἐπὶ πλεῖόν σε ἐγκόπτω</span> Ac 24:4 is understood by Syr. and Armen. versions to mean <i>in order not to weary you any further</i>; cp. <span class="greek">ἔγκοπος</span> <i>weary</i> Diog. L. 4, 50; LXX; and <span class="greek">ἔγκοπον ποιεῖν</span> <i>to weary</i> Job 19:2; Is 43:23. But <i>impose on</i> is also prob.; <i>detain</i> NRSV.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402417"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “request.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402418"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term is another NT <i>hapax legomenon</i> (BDAG 976 s.v. <span class="greek">συντόμως</span> 2). Tertullus was asking for a brief hearing, and implying to the governor that he would speak briefly and to the point.</p></p>
<p id="n4402419"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 371 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιείκεια</span> has “<span class="greek">τῇ σῇ ἐ</span>. <i>with your (customary) indulgence</i> Ac 24:4.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402420"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For having found.” The participle <span class="greek">εὑρόντες</span> (<span class="translit">heurontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402421"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 22.6 has “(a figurative extension of meaning of <span class="greek">λοιμός</span> ‘plague,’ 23.158) one who causes all sorts of trouble—‘troublemaker, pest.’…‘for we have found this man to be a troublemaker” Ac 24:5.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402422"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dissensions.” While BDAG 940 s.v. <span class="greek">στάσις</span> 3 translates this phrase “<span class="greek">κινεῖν στάσεις</span> (v.l. <span class="greek">στάσιν</span>) <span class="greek">τισί</span> <i>create dissension among certain people</i> Ac 24:5, ” it is better on the basis of the actual results of Paul’s ministry to categorize this usage under section 2, “<i>uprising, riot, revolt, rebellion</i>” (cf. the use in Acts 19:40).</p></p>
<p id="n4402423"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term is yet another NT <i>hapax legomenon</i> (BDAG 894 s.v. <span class="greek">πρωτοστάτης</span>).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>A ringleader</i>. Tertullus’ basic argument was that Paul was a major disturber of the public peace. To ignore this the governor would be shunning his duty to preserve the peace and going against the pattern of his rule. In effect, Tertullus claimed that Paul was seditious (a claim the governor could not afford to ignore).</p></p>
<p id="n4402424"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402424">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The sect of the Nazarenes</i> is a designation for followers of Jesus the Nazarene, that is, Christians.</p></p>
<p id="n4402425"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“who”) was replaced by the third person singular pronoun (“he”) and a new sentence begun here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402426"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “profane” (BDAG 173 s.v. <span class="greek">βεβηλόω</span>). The term was also used of profaning the Sabbath.</p></p>
<p id="n4402427"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402427">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “seized.” <i>Grk</i> “whom also we arrested.” Because of the awkwardness of a relative clause in English at this point, the relative pronoun (“whom”) was replaced by the pronoun “him” as object of the verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4402428"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402428">28</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> include some material at the end of v. 6, all of <b>24:7</b>, and some material at the beginning of v. 8: “and we wanted to judge him according to our law. <b>24:7</b> But Lysias the commanding officer came and took him out of our hands with a great deal of violence, <b>24:8</b> ordering those who accused him to come before you.” Acts 24:6b, 7, and 8a are lacking in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B H L P 049 81 1175 1241 <i>pm</i> and a few versional witnesses. They are included (with a few minor variations) in E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 323 614 945 1505 1739 <i>pm</i> and a few versional witnesses. This verse (and parts of verses) is most likely not a part of the original text of Acts, for not only is it lacking from the better witnesses, there is no easy explanation as to <i>how</i> such could be missing from them. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n4402429"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402429">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “question.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402430"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “From whom when you examine him yourself, you will be able to learn…” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) was replaced by the third person singular pronoun (“him”) and a new sentence begun at the beginning of v. 8 in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402431"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about all these things of which we are accusing him.” This has been simplified to eliminate the relative pronoun (“of which”) in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402432"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402432">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “joined in the attack,” but the adjective “verbal” has been supplied to clarify that this was not another physical assault on Paul. The verb is another NT <i>hapax legomenon</i> (BDAG 969 s.v. <span class="greek">συνεπιτίθημι</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402433"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402433">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “asserting” (BDAG 1050 s.v. <span class="greek">φάσκω</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402434"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402434">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιστάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">epistamenos</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4402435"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402435">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>“Because…defense.”</i> Paul also paid an indirect compliment to the governor, implying that he would be fair in his judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n4402436"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402436">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 369 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιγινώσκω</span> 2.c has “<i>notice, perceive, learn of, ascertain</i>…Also as legal t.t. <i>ascertain</i> (2 Macc 14:9) <span class="greek">τὶ</span> Ac 23:28; cp. 24:8. W. <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> foll. Ac 24:11.” “Verify” is an English synonym for “ascertain.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402437"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402437">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it is not more than twelve days from when.” This has been simplified to “not more than twelve days ago.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Part of Paul’s defense is that he would not have had time to organize a revolt, since he had arrived in Jerusalem <i>not more than twelve days ago</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4402439"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402439">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “disputing,” “conducting a heated discussion.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402440"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402440">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 381 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπίστασις</span> 2 has “<span class="greek">ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> ποιεῖν ὄχλου</span> <i>to cause a crowd to gather</i> Ac 24:12.” Roman authorities would not allow a mob to gather and threaten the peace, and anyone suspected of instigating a mob would certainly be arrested.</p></p>
<p id="n4402441"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402441">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the temple.” This is actually a reference to the courts surrounding the temple proper, and has been translated accordingly.</p></p>
<p id="n4402442"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402442">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4402443"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402443">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> A second part of Paul’s defense is that he did nothing while he was in Jerusalem to cause unrest, neither <i>arguing</i> nor <i>stirring up a crowd in the temple courts or in the synagogues or throughout the city</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4402444"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402444">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 778 s.v. <span class="greek">παρίστημι</span>/<span class="greek">παριστάνω</span> 1.f has “<span class="greek">οὐδὲ παραστῆσαι δύνανταί σοι περὶ ὧν νυνὶ κατηγοροῦσίν μου</span> <i>nor can they prove to you the accusations they are now making against me</i> Ac 24:13.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Nor can they prove</i>. This is a formal legal claim that Paul’s opponents lacked proof of any wrongdoing. They had no witness who could justify the arrest at the temple.</p></p>
<p id="n4402445"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402445">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the things” are not in the Greek text but are implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4402446"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402446">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “nor can they prove to you [the things] about which they are now accusing me.” This has been simplified to eliminate the relative pronoun (“which”) in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402447"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402447">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “serve.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402448"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402448">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402449"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402449">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, the <i>law</i> of Moses. Paul was claiming that he legitimately worshiped the God of Israel. He was arguing that this amounted to a religious dispute rather than a political one, so that the Roman authorities need not concern themselves with it.</p></p>
<p id="n4402450"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402450">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having.” The participle <span class="greek">ἔχων</span> (<span class="translit">echōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb and a new sentence begun at this point in the translation because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n4402451"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402451">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> This mention of Paul’s <i>hope</i> sets up his appeal to the resurrection of the dead. At this point Paul was ignoring the internal Jewish dispute between the Pharisees (to which he had belonged; Acts 23:6) and the Sadducees (who denied there would be a resurrection of the dead; Acts 23:8).</p></p>
<p id="n4402452"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402452">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a hope in God (which these [men] themselves accept too).” Because the antecedent of the relative pronoun “which” is somewhat unclear in English, the words “a hope” have been repeated at the beginning of the parenthesis for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402453"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402453">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that they”; the referent (these men, Paul’s accusers) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402454"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402454">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the unjust.”</p><p><b>sn</b> This is the only mention of the resurrection of the <i>unrighteous</i> in Acts. The idea parallels the idea of Jesus as the judge of both the living and the dead (Acts 10:42; 17:31).</p></p>
<p id="n4402455"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402455">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 329 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐν</span> 9.a, “<span class="greek">ἐν τούτῳ πιστεύομεν</span> <i>this is the reason why we believe</i> Jn 16:30; cp. Ac 24:16.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402456"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402456">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 224 s.v. <span class="greek">διά</span> 2.a, “<span class="greek">διὰ παντός</span>…<i>always, continually, constantly</i>…Ac 2:25 (Ps 16:8); 10:2; 24:16.” However, the positioning of the adverb “always” in the English translation is difficult; the position used is one of the least awkward.</p></p>
<p id="n4402457"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402457">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 125 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπρόσκοπος</span> 1 has “<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> συνείδησις</span> <i>a clear conscience</i> Ac 24:16.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402458"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402458">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men,” but this is a generic use (Paul does not have only males in view).</p></p>
<p id="n4402459"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402459">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 401 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔτος</span> has “<span class="greek">δι᾿ ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> πλειόνων</span> <i>after several years</i> 24:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402460"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402460">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to bring alms,” but the term “alms” is not in common use today, so the closest modern equivalent, “gifts for the poor,” is used instead.</p></p>
<p id="n4402461"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402461">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sacrifices.” BDAG 887 s.v. <span class="greek">προσφορά</span> 1 has “<span class="greek">προσφοράς ποιεῖν</span> <i>have sacrifices made</i> Ac 24:17, ” but this may be overly specific. It is not clear from the immediate context whether the offering of sacrificial animals (so BDAG assumes) or offerings of some other sort (such as financial gifts) are in view. The combination with <span class="greek">ἐλεημοσύνας</span> (<span class="translit">eleēmosunas</span>) in the preceding clause may suggest monetary offerings. Some have suggested this is an allusion to the payments made by Paul on behalf of the four other men mentioned in Acts 21:23-26, but the text here seems to suggest something Paul had planned to do before he came, while the decision to pay for the expenses of the men in 21:23ff. was made at the suggestion of the Jerusalem leadership after he arrived. In either case, Paul was portraying himself as a pious worshiper of his God.</p></p>
<p id="n4402462"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402462">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Ritually purified</i>. Paul’s claim here is that he was honoring the holiness of God by being sensitive to issues of ritual purity. Not only was he not guilty of the charges against him, but he was thoroughly devout.</p></p>
<p id="n4402463"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402463">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 458 s.v. <span class="greek">θόρυβος</span> 3.b has “<span class="greek">μετὰ θορύβου</span>…<i>with a disturbance</i> Ac 24:18.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402464"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402464">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n4402465"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402465">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 533 s.v. <span class="greek">κατηγορέω</span> 1 states, “nearly always as legal t.t.: <i>bring charges</i> in court.” L&amp;N 33.427 states for <span class="greek">κατηγορέω</span> (<span class="translit">katēgoreō</span>), “to bring serious charges or accusations against someone, with the possible connotation of a legal or court context—‘to accuse, to bring charges.’”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Who should be here…and bring charges</i>. Paul was asking, where were those who brought about his arrest and claimed he broke the law? His accusers were not really present. This subtle point raised the issue of injustice.</p></p>
<p id="n4402466"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402466">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these [men] themselves.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402467"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402467">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “unrighteous act.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402468"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402468">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “me guilty of” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. L&amp;N 88.23 has “<span class="greek">αὐτοὶ οὗτοι εἰπάτωσαν τί εὗρον ἀδίκημα στάντος μου</span> ‘let these men themselves tell what unrighteous act they found me guilty of’ Ac 24:20.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402469"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402469">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Sanhedrin” (the Sanhedrin was the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n4402470"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402470">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 433 s.v. <span class="greek">ἤ</span> 2.c has “<span class="greek">οὐδὲν ἕτερον ἤ</span> <i>nothing else than</i>…Ac 17:21. <span class="greek">τί</span>…<span class="greek">ἤ</span> <i>what other</i>…<i>than</i>…24:21.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402471"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402471">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “one utterance.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402472"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402472">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Cf. BDAG 327 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐν</span> 1.e, which has “<i>before, in the presence of,</i> etc.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402473"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402473">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The resurrection of the dead</i>. Paul’s point was, what crime was there in holding this religious belief?</p></p>
<p id="n4402474"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402474">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Antonius <i>Felix</i> in 23:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4402475"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402475">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the things.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402476"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402476">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, concerning Christianity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402477"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402477">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 39 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀκριβῶς</span> has “Comp. <span class="greek">ἀκριβέστερον</span> <i>more exactly</i>…<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἐκτίθεσθαι</span> <i>explain more exactly</i> Ac 18:26, cp. 23:15, 20; also <i>more accurately</i>…24:22.” Felix knew more about the Christian movement than what the Jewish leaders had told him.</p></p>
<p id="n4402478"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402478">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 56.18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναβάλλω</span> has “to adjourn a court proceeding until a later time—‘to adjourn a hearing, to stop a hearing and put it off until later.’…‘then Felix, who was well informed about the Way, adjourned their hearing’ Ac 24:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402479"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402479">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 227 s.v. <span class="greek">διαγινώσκω</span> 2 states, “to make a judicial decision, <i>decide/hear (a case)</i>…<span class="greek">τὰ καθ᾿ ὑμᾶς</span> <i>decide your case</i> Ac 24:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402480"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402480">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402481"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402481">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that he was to be guarded.” The passive construction (<span class="greek">τηρεῖσθαι</span>, <span class="translit">tēreisthai</span>) has been converted to an active one in parallel with the following clauses, and the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402482"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402482">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 77 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄνεσις</span> 1 states, “lit. relaxation of custodial control, <i>some liberty</i>, <span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἔχειν</span> <i>have some freedom</i> Ac 24:23.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402483"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402483">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “any of his own” (this could also refer to relatives).</p></p>
<p id="n4402484"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402484">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from serving him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402485"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402485">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Antonius <i>Felix</i> in 23:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4402486"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402486">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> It is possible that <i>Drusilla</i>, being Jewish, was the source of Felix’s knowledge about the new movement called Christianity. The youngest daughter of Herod Agrippa I and sister of Agrippa II, she would have been close to 20 years old at the time. She had married the king of a small region in Syria but divorced him at the age of 16 to marry Felix. This was her second marriage and Felix’s third (Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 19.9.1 [19.354], 20.7.2 [20.141-144]). As a member of Herod’s family, she probably knew about the Way.</p></p>
<p id="n4402487"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402487">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “speak” is implied; BDAG 32 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀκούω</span> 1.c has “<span class="greek">ἤκουσεν αὐτοῦ περὶ τῆς</span>…<span class="greek">πίστεως</span> <i>he heard him speak about faith</i> Ac 24:24.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402488"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402488">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah Jesus”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402489"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402489">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402490"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402490">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “speaking about.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402491"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402491">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and self-control.” This <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p><p><b>sn</b> The topic of <i>self-control</i> was appropriate in view of the personal history of both Felix and Drusilla (see the note on “Drusilla” in the previous verse), and might well account for Felix’s anxiety.</p></p>
<p id="n4402492"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402492">92</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Felix</i> in 23:26.</p></p>
<p id="n4402493"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402493">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “becoming.” The participle <span class="greek">γενόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">genomenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402494"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402494">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “when I find time.” BDAG 639 s.v. <span class="greek">μεταλαμβάνω</span> 2 has “<span class="greek">καιρὸν μ</span>. <i>have an opportunity = find time</i>…Ac 24:25.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402495"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402495">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he was hoping that money would be given to him by Paul.” To simplify the translation, the passive construction has been converted to an active one.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Would give him money</i>. That is, would offer him a bribe in exchange for his release. Such practices were fairly common among Roman officials of the period (Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 2.12.3 [2.272-274]).</p></p>
<p id="n4402496"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402496">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402497"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402497">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> “As often as possible” reflects the comparative form of the adjective <span class="greek">πυκνός</span> (<span class="translit">puknos</span>); see BDAG 897 s.v. <span class="greek">πυκνός</span>, which has “Neut. of the comp. <span class="greek">πυκνότερον</span> as adv. <i>more often, more frequently</i> and in an elative sense <i>very often, quite frequently</i>…also <i>as often as possible</i>…Ac 24:26.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402498"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402498">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term, which could mean “conferred with him,” see BDAG 705 s.v. <span class="greek">ὁμιλέω</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4402499"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n4402499">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “After a two-year period.”</p></p>
<p id="n44024100"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n44024100">100</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Porcius Festus</i> was the procurator of Palestine who succeeded Felix; neither the beginning nor the end of his rule (at his death) can be determined with certainty, although he appears to have died in office after about two years. Nero recalled Felix in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 57 or 58, and Festus was appointed to his vacant office in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 57, 58, or 59. According to Josephus (<i>Ant</i>. 20.8.9-10 [20.182-188]; <i>J. W</i>. 2.14.1 [2.271-272]), his administration was better than that of his predecessor Felix or his successor Albinus, but Luke in Acts portrays him in a less favorable light: He was willing to sacrifice Paul to court Jewish favor by taking him to Jerusalem for trial (see 25:9), regardless of Paul’s guilt or innocence. The one characteristic for which Festus was noted is that he dealt harshly with those who disturbed the peace.</p></p>
<p id="n44024101"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n44024101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Felix received as successor Porcius Festus.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Felix</i> in 23:26.</p></p>
<p id="n44024102"><a href="file1086.xhtml#n44024102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “left Paul imprisoned.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Felix left Paul in prison</i>. Luke makes the point that politics got in the way of justice here; keeping Paul in prison was a political favor to the Jews.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
