<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 1</h2>
<p id="n420011"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n420011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Since” or “Because.” This begins a long sentence that extends through v. 4. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences, the Greek sentence has been divided up into shorter English sentences in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n420012"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n420012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is sometimes translated “narrative,” but the term itself can refer to an oral or written account. It is the verb “undertaken” which suggests a written account, since it literally is “to set one’s hand” to something (BDAG 386 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιχειρέω</span>). “Narrative” is too specific, denoting a particular genre of work for the accounts that existed in the earlier tradition. Not all of that material would have been narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n420013"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n420013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “events.”</p></p>
<p id="n420014"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n420014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “have been accomplished.” Given Luke’s emphasis on divine design (e.g., Luke 24:43-47) a stronger sense (“fulfilled”) is better than a mere reference to something having taken place (“accomplished”).</p></p>
<p id="n420015"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n420015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “even as”; this compares the recorded tradition of 1:1 with the original eyewitness tradition of 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n420016"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n420016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “delivered.”</p></p>
<p id="n420017"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n420017">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>eyewitnesses and servants of the word</i> refers to a single group of people who faithfully passed on the accounts about Jesus. The language about delivery (<i>passed on</i>) points to accounts faithfully passed on to the early church.</p></p>
<p id="n420018"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n420018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “like the accounts those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and servants of the word passed on to us.” The location of “in the beginning” in the Greek shows that the tradition is rooted in those who were with Jesus from the start.</p></p>
<p id="n420019"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n420019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The conjunction “so” is supplied here to bring out the force of the latter part of this Greek sentence, which the translation divides up because of English style. Luke, in compiling his account, is joining a tradition with good precedent.</p></p>
<p id="n4200110"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200110">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> When Luke says <i>it seemed good to me as well</i> he is not being critical of the earlier accounts, but sees himself stepping into a tradition of reporting about Jesus to which he will add uniquely a second volume on the early church when he writes the Book of Acts.</p></p>
<p id="n4200111"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having followed”; the participle <span class="greek">παρηκολουθηκότι</span> (<span class="translit">parēkolouthēkoti</span>) has been translated causally.</p></p>
<p id="n4200112"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200112">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>An orderly account</i> does not necessarily mean that all events are recorded in the exact chronological sequence in which they occurred, but that the account produced is an orderly one. This could include, for example, thematic or topical order rather than strict chronological order.</p></p>
<p id="n4200113"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “know the truth about”; or “know the certainty of.” The issue of the context is psychological confidence; Luke’s work is trying to encourage Theophilus. So in English this is better translated as “know for certain” than “know certainty” or “know the truth,” which sounds too cognitive. “Certain” assumes the truth of the report. On this term, see Acts 2:36; 21:34; 22:30; 25:26. The meaning “have assurance concerning” is also possible here.</p></p>
<p id="n4200114"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you heard about.” This term can refer merely to a report of information (Acts 21:24) or to instruction (Acts 18:25). The scope of Luke’s Gospel as a whole, which calls for perseverance in the faith and which assumes much knowledge of the OT, suggests Theophilus had received some instruction and was probably a believer.</p></p>
<p id="n4200115"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened that in the days.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4200116"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200116">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Herod</i> was Herod the Great, who ruled Palestine from 37 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> until he died in 4 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> He was known for his extensive building projects (including the temple in Jerusalem) and for his cruelty.</p></p>
<p id="n4200117"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of,” but the meaning of the preposition <span class="greek">ἐκ</span> (<span class="translit">ek</span>) is more accurately expressed in contemporary English by the relative clause “who belonged to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200118"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200118">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> There were twenty-four divisions of priesthood and <i>the priestly division of Abijah</i> was eighth on the list according to 1 Chr 24:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4200119"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and her name was Elizabeth.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200120"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a wife of the daughters of Aaron.”</p><p><b>sn</b> It was not unusual for a priest to have a wife from a priestly family (<i>a descendant of Aaron</i>); this was regarded as a special blessing.</p></p>
<p id="n4200121"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4200122"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “walking in” (an idiom for one’s lifestyle).</p><p><b>sn</b> The description of Zechariah and Elizabeth as <i>following…blamelessly</i> was not to say that they were sinless, but that they were faithful and pious. Thus a practical righteousness is meant here (Gen 6:8; Deut 28:9).</p></p>
<p id="n4200123"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The predicate adjective has the effect of an adverb here (BDF §243).</p></p>
<p id="n4200124"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200124">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Elizabeth was barren</i>. Both Zechariah and Elizabeth are regarded by Luke as <i>righteous in the sight of God, following all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blamelessly</i> (v. 6). With this language, reminiscent of various passages in the OT, Luke is probably drawing implicit comparisons to the age and barrenness of such famous OT personalities as Abraham and Sarah (see, e.g., Gen 18:9-15), the mother of Samson (Judg 13:2-5), and Hannah, the mother of Samuel (1 Sam 1:1-20). And, as it was in the case of these OT saints, so it is with Elizabeth: After much anguish and seeking the Lord, she too is going to have a son in her barrenness. In that day it was a great reproach to be childless, for children were a sign of God’s blessing (cf. Gen 1:28; Lev 20:20-21; Pss 127 and 128; Jer 22:30). As the dawn of salvation draws near, however, God will change this elderly couple’s grief into great joy and grant them the one desire time had rendered impossible.</p></p>
<p id="n4200125"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “were both advanced in days” (an idiom for old age).</p></p>
<p id="n4200126"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4200127"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Zechariah) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200128"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “serving as priest in the order of his division before God.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Zechariah’s division would be <i>on duty</i> twice a year for a week at a time.</p></p>
<p id="n4200129"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to the custom of the priesthood it fell to him by lot.” The order of the clauses has been rearranged in the translation to make it clear that the prepositional phrase <span class="greek">κατὰ τὸ ἔθος τῆς ἱερατείας</span> (<span class="translit">kata to ethos tēs hierateias</span>, “according to the custom of the priesthood”) modifies the phrase “it fell to him by lot” rather than the preceding clause.</p></p>
<p id="n4200130"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is an aorist participle and is temporally related to the offering of incense, not to when the lot fell.</p></p>
<p id="n4200131"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “temple.” Such sacrifices, which included the burning of incense, would have occurred in the holy place according to the Mishnah (<i>m. Tamid</i> 1.2; 3.1; 5-7). A priest would have given this sacrifice, which was offered for the nation, once in one’s career. It would be offered either at 9 a.m. or 3 p.m., since it was made twice a day.</p></p>
<p id="n4200132"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And,” but “now” better represents the somewhat parenthetical nature of this statement in the flow of the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200133"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all the multitude.” While “assembly” is sometimes used here to translate <span class="greek">πλῆθος</span> (<span class="translit">plēthos</span>), that term usually implies in English a specific or particular group of people. However, this was simply a large group gathered outside, which was not unusual, especially for the afternoon offering.</p></p>
<p id="n4200134"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural verb is used here on the probability that the crowd acted as individuals, each person praying on their own but at the same time. English versions are divided on how they handle this; see, e.g., NRSV, HCSB, which have the singular verb “was praying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200135"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> The “hour of the incense offering” is another way to refer to the time of sacrifice.</p></p>
<p id="n4200136"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And an angel.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4200137"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the angel of the Lord.” Linguistically, “angel of the Lord” is the same in both testaments (and thus, he is either “an angel of the Lord” or “the angel of the Lord” in both testaments). For arguments and implications, see <i>ExSyn</i> 252; M. J. Davidson, “Angels,” <i>DJG</i>, 9; W. G. MacDonald argues for “an angel” in both testaments: “Christology and ‘The Angel of the Lord’,” <i>Current Issues in Biblical and Patristic Interpretation</i>, 324-35. </p></p>
<p id="n4200138"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200138">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> This term is often used to describe a supernatural appearance (24:34; Acts 2:3; 7:2, 30, 35; 9:17; 13:31; 16:9; 26:16).</p></p>
<p id="n4200139"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200139">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the angel” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4200140"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and he was afraid”; <i>Grk</i> “fear fell upon him.” Fear is common when supernatural agents appear (1:29-30, 65; 2:9; 5:8-10; 9:34; 24:38; Exod 15:16; Judg 6:22-23; 13:6, 22; 2 Sam 6:9).</p></p>
<p id="n4200141"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The passive means that the prayer was heard by God.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Your prayer has been heard</i>. Zechariah’s prayer while offering the sacrifice would have been for the nation, but the answer to the prayer also gave them a long hoped-for child, a hope they had abandoned because of their old age.</p></p>
<p id="n4200142"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a son, and you”; <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated. Instead a semicolon is used in the translation for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4200143"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you will call his name John.” The future tense here functions like a command (see <i>ExSyn</i> 569-70). This same construction occurs in v. 31.</p><p><b>sn</b> “<i>Do not be afraid…you must call his name John</i>.” This is a standard birth announcement (see Gen 16:11; Isa 7:14; Matt 1:21; Luke 1:31).</p></p>
<p id="n4200144"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “This will be joy and gladness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200145"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because of.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200146"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> “At his birth” is more precise as the grammatical subject (1:58), though “at his coming” is a possible force, since it is his mission, as the following verses note, that will really bring joy.</p></p>
<p id="n4200147"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “before.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200148"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200148">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he”; because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4200149"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “even from his mother’s womb.” While this idiom may be understood to refer to the point of birth (“even from his birth”), Luke 1:41 suggests that here it should be understood to refer to a time before birth.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>He will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even before his birth</i>. This is the language of the birth of a prophet (Judg 13:5, 7; Isa 49:1; Jer 1:5; Sir 49:7); see 1:41 for the first fulfillment.</p></p>
<p id="n4200150"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200151"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200151">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> The word translated <i>will turn</i> is a good summary term for repentance and denotes John’s call to a change of direction (Luke 3:1-14).</p></p>
<p id="n4200152"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200152">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sons,” but clearly this is a generic reference to people of both genders.</p></p>
<p id="n4200153"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200153">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “before him”; the referent (the Lord) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200154"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200154">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> These two lines cover all relationships: <i>Turn the hearts of the fathers back to their children</i> points to horizontal relationships, while (turn) <i>the disobedient to the wisdom of the just</i> shows what God gives from above in a vertical manner.</p></p>
<p id="n4200155"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200155">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Zechariah.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200156"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200156">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “How will I know this?”</p></p>
<p id="n4200157"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200157">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is advanced in days” (an idiom for old age).</p></p>
<p id="n4200158"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200158">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200159"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200159">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one who is standing before God.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200160"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200160">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to announce these things of good news to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200161"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200161">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200162"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200162">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> The predicted fulfillment in the expression <i>my words, which will be fulfilled in their time</i> takes place in Luke 1:63-66.</p></p>
<p id="n4200163"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200163">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Silent, unable to speak</i>. Actually Zechariah was deaf and mute as 1:61-63 indicates, since others had to use gestures to communicate with him.</p></p>
<p id="n4200164"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200164">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic. </p></p>
<p id="n4200165"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200165">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐθαύμαζον</span> (<span class="translit">ethaumazon</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4200166"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200166">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “temple.” See the note on the phrase “the holy place” in v. 9.</p></p>
<p id="n4200167"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200167">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200168"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200168">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and they.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200169"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200169">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “he had had a supernatural encounter in the holy place,” since the angel came to Zechariah by the altar. This was not just a “mental experience.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200170"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200170">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “temple.” See the note on the phrase “the holy place” in v. 9.</p></p>
<p id="n4200171"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200171">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and,” but the force is causal or explanatory in context.</p></p>
<p id="n4200172"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200172">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “dumb,” but this could be understood to mean “stupid” in contemporary English, whereas the point is that he was speechless.</p></p>
<p id="n4200173"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200173">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that as the days of his service were ended.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4200174"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200174">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “After these days.” The phrase refers to a general, unspecified period of time that passes before fulfillment comes.</p></p>
<p id="n4200175"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200175">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Elizabeth conceived.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200176"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200176">76</a> <p><b>sn</b> The text does not state why <i>Elizabeth</i> withdrew into <i>seclusion</i>, nor is the reason entirely clear.</p></p>
<p id="n4200177"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200177">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “she kept herself in seclusion, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγουσα</span> (<span class="translit">legousa</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200178"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200178">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Thus.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200179"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200179">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the days.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200180"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200180">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has looked on me” (an idiom for taking favorable notice of someone).</p></p>
<p id="n4200181"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200181">81</a> <p><b>sn</b> Barrenness was often seen as a reproach or <i>disgrace</i> (Lev 20:20-21; Jer 22:30), but now at her late age (the exact age is never given in Luke’s account), God had miraculously removed it (see also Luke 1:7).</p></p>
<p id="n4200182"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200182">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “among men,” but the context clearly indicates a generic use of <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) here.</p></p>
<p id="n4200183"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200183">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the sixth month.” The phrase “of Elizabeth’s pregnancy” was supplied in the translation to clarify the exact time meant by this reference. That Elizabeth’s pregnancy is meant is clear from vv. 24-25.</p></p>
<p id="n4200184"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200184">84</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Gabriel</i> is the same angel mentioned previously in v. 19. He is traditionally identified as an angel who brings revelation (see Dan 8:15-16; 9:21). Gabriel and Michael are the only two good angels named in the Bible.</p></p>
<p id="n4200185"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200185">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from.” The account suggests God’s planned direction in these events, so “by” is better than “from,” as six months into Elizabeth’s pregnancy, God acts again.</p></p>
<p id="n4200186"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200186">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Nazareth</i> was a town in the region of Galilee, located north of Samaria and Judea. Galilee extended from about 45 to 85 miles north of Jerusalem and was about 30 miles in width. Nazareth was a very small village and was located about 15 miles west of the southern edge of the Sea of Galilee. </p></p>
<p id="n4200187"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200187">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “promised in marriage.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200188"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200188">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Joseph, of the house of David.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The Greek word order here favors connecting Davidic descent to Joseph, not Mary, in this remark.</p></p>
<p id="n4200189"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200189">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And coming to her.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200190"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200190">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And coming to her, he said”; the referent (the angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200191"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200191">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “coming to her, he said.” The participle <span class="greek">εἰσελθών</span> (<span class="translit">eiselthōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200192"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200192">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> The address, “favored one” (a perfect participle, <i>Grk</i> “Oh one who is favored”) points to Mary as the recipient of God’s grace, not a bestower of it. She is a model saint in this passage, one who willingly receives God’s benefits. The Vulgate rendering “full of grace” suggests something more of Mary as a bestower of grace, but does not make sense here contextually.</p></p>
<p id="n4200193"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200193">93</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A C D <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy) read here <span class="greek">εὐλογημένη σὺ ἐν γυναιξίν</span> (<span class="translit">eulogēmenē su en gunaixin</span>, “blessed are you among women”) which also appears in 1:42 (where it is textually certain). This has the earmarks of a scribal addition for balance; the shorter reading, attested by the most significant witnesses and several others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L W <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 565 579 700 1241 co), is thus preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4200194"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200194">94</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A C <span class="greek">Θ</span> 0130 ƒ<sup>13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy) have <span class="greek">ἰδοῦσα</span> (<span class="translit">idousa</span>, “when [she] saw [the angel]”) here as well, making Mary’s concern the appearance of the angel. This construction is harder than the shorter reading since it adds a transitive verb without an explicit object. However, the shorter reading has significant support (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D L W <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 565 579 1241 sa) and on balance should probably be considered authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n4200195"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200195">95</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the phrase <i>greatly troubled</i> see 1:12. Mary’s reaction was like Zechariah’s response.</p></p>
<p id="n4200196"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200196">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to wonder what kind of greeting this might be.” Luke often uses the optative this way to reveal a figure’s thinking (3:15; 8:9; 18:36; 22:23).</p></p>
<p id="n4200197"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200197">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that Gabriel’s statement is a response to Mary’s perplexity over the greeting.</p></p>
<p id="n4200198"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200198">98</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Do not be afraid</i>. See 1:13 for a similar statement to Zechariah.</p></p>
<p id="n4200199"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n4200199">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “grace.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>found favor</i> is a Semitism, common in the OT (Gen 6:8; 18:3; 43:14; 2 Sam 15:25). God has chosen to act on this person’s behalf.</p></p>
<p id="n42001100"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001101"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you will conceive in your womb.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001102"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and bear.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001103"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you will call his name.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001104"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> See v. 13 for a similar construction.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>You will name him Jesus</i>. This verse reflects the birth announcement of a major figure; see 1:13; Gen 16:7; Judg 13:5; Isa 7:14. The Greek form of the name <span class="translit">Iēsous</span>, which was translated into Latin as <i>Jesus</i>, is the same as the Hebrew <span class="translit">Yeshua</span> (Joshua), which means “Yahweh saves” (Yahweh is typically rendered as “Lord” in the OT). It was a fairly common name among Jews in 1st century Palestine, as references to a number of people by this name in the LXX and Josephus indicate.</p></p>
<p id="n42001105"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001106"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001106">106</a> <p><b>sn</b> Compare the description of Jesus as <i>great</i> here with 1:15, “great before the Lord.” Jesus is greater than John, since he is Messiah compared to a prophet. <i>Great</i> is stated absolutely without qualification to make the point.</p></p>
<p id="n42001107"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>Most High</i> is a way to refer to God without naming him. Such avoiding of direct reference to God was common in 1st century Judaism out of reverence for the divine name.</p></p>
<p id="n42001108"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “ancestor.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001109"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. A new sentence is begun here in the translation because of the length of the sentence in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n42001110"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “over Israel.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>house of Jacob</i> refers to Israel. This points to the Messiah’s relationship to the people of Israel.</p></p>
<p id="n42001111"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Mary.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42001112"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have not known.” The expression in the Greek text is a euphemism for sexual relations. Mary seems to have sensed that the declaration had an element of immediacy to it that excluded Joseph. Many modern translations render this phrase “since I am a virgin,” but the Greek word for virgin is not used in the text.</p></p>
<p id="n42001113"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the angel said to her.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. The pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτῇ</span> (<span class="translit">autē</span>, “to her”) has not been included in the translation since it is redundant in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n42001114"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001114">114</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>will overshadow</i> is a reference to God’s glorious presence at work (Exod 40:34-35; Ps 91:4).</p></p>
<p id="n42001115"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the one born holy will be called the Son of God.” The wording of this phrase depends on whether the adjective is a predicate adjective, as in the text, or is an adjective modifying the participle serving as the subject. The absence of an article with the adjective speaks for a predicate position. Other less appealing options supply a verb for “holy”; thus “the one who is born will be holy”; or argue that both “holy” and “Son of God” are predicates, so “The one who is born will be called holy, the Son of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001116"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001116">116</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (C* <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 <i>pc</i>) add “by you” here. This looks like a scribal addition to bring symmetry to the first three clauses of the angel’s message (note the second person pronoun in the previous two clauses), and is too poorly supported to be seriously considered as authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n42001117"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Therefore the holy child to be born will be called the Son of God.” There are two ways to understand the Greek phrase <span class="greek">τὸ γεννώμενον ἅγιον</span> (<span class="translit">to gennōmenon hagion</span>) here. First, <span class="greek">τὸ γεννώμενον</span> could be considered a substantival participle with <span class="greek">ἅγιον</span> as an adjective in the second predicate position, thus making a complete sentence; this interpretation is reflected in the translation above. Second, <span class="greek">τὸ ἅγιον</span> could be considered a substantival adjective with <span class="greek">γεννώμενον</span> acting as an adjectival participle, thus making the phrase the subject of the verb <span class="greek">κληθήσεται</span> (<span class="translit">klēthēsetai</span>); this interpretation is reflected in the alternative reading. Treating the participle <span class="greek">γεννώμενον</span> as adjectival is a bit unnatural for the very reason that it forces one to understand <span class="greek">ἅγιον</span> as substantival; this introduces a new idea in the text with <span class="greek">ἅγιον</span> when an already new topic is being introduced with <span class="greek">γεννώμενον</span>. Semantically this would overload the new subject introduced at this point. For this reason the first interpretation is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n42001118"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001119"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> Some translations render the word <span class="greek">συγγενίς</span> (<span class="translit">sungenis</span>) as “cousin” (so Phillips) but the term is not necessarily this specific.</p></p>
<p id="n42001120"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has conceived.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001121"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and this is the sixth month for her who was called barren.” Yet another note on Elizabeth’s loss of reproach also becomes a sign of the truth of the angel’s declaration.</p></p>
<p id="n42001122"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> In Greek, the phrase <span class="greek">πᾶν ῥῆμα</span> (<span class="translit">pan rhēma</span>, combined with a negation in the verse is translated as “nothing”) has an emphatic position, giving it emphasis as the lesson in the entire discussion. The remark is a call for faith.</p></p>
<p id="n42001123"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the transition to a new topic. </p></p>
<p id="n42001124"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001125"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “handmaid”; <i>Grk</i> “slave woman.” Though <span class="greek">δούλη</span> (<span class="translit">doulē</span>) is normally translated “woman servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free woman serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v. <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself or herself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. </p></p>
<p id="n42001126"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let this be to me.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001127"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001127">127</a> <p><b>sn</b> The remark <i>according to your word</i> is a sign of Mary’s total submission to God’s will, a response that makes her exemplary.</p></p>
<p id="n42001128"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42001129"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001129">129</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>In those days</i> is another general time reference, though the sense of the context is that the visit came shortly after Mary miraculously conceived and shortly after the announcement about Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n42001130"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001130">130</a> <p><b>sn</b> The author does not say exactly where Elizabeth stayed. The location is given generally as <i>a town of Judah</i>. Judah is about a three day trip south of Nazareth.</p></p>
<p id="n42001131"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here either.</p></p>
<p id="n42001132"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001132">132</a> <p><b>sn</b> When <i>the baby leaped</i> John gave his first testimony about Jesus, a fulfillment of 1:15.</p></p>
<p id="n42001133"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> The antecedent of “her” is Elizabeth.</p></p>
<p id="n42001134"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001134">134</a> <p><b>sn</b> The passage makes clear that Elizabeth spoke her commentary with prophetic enablement, <i>filled with the Holy Spirit</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n42001135"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and she.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was begun here in the translation. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42001136"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and she exclaimed with a great cry and said.” The verb <span class="greek">εἶπεν</span> (<span class="translit">eipen</span>, “said”) has not been included in the translation since it is redundant in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n42001137"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001137">137</a> <p><b>sn</b> The commendation <i>Blessed are you among women</i> means that Mary has a unique privilege to be the mother of the promised one of God.</p></p>
<p id="n42001138"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fruit,” which is figurative here for the child she would give birth to.</p></p>
<p id="n42001139"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001139">139</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “From where this to me?” The translation suggests the note of humility and surprise that Elizabeth feels in being a part of these events. The <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clause which follows explains what “this” is. A literal translation would read “From where this to me, that is, that the mother of my Lord comes to visit me?”</p></p>
<p id="n42001140"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001141"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001141">141</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “when the sound of your greeting [reached] my ears.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001142"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001142">142</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the statement <i>the baby in my womb leaped for joy</i> see both 1:14 and 1:47. This notes a fulfillment of God’s promised word.</p></p>
<p id="n42001143"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001143">143</a> <p><b>sn</b> Again the note of being <i>blessed</i> makes the key point of the passage about believing God.</p></p>
<p id="n42001144"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001144">144</a> <p><b>tn</b> This <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) clause, technically indirect discourse after <span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> (<span class="translit">pisteuō</span>), explains the content of the faith, a belief in God’s promise coming to pass.</p></p>
<p id="n42001145"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001145">145</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “<i>what was said to her</i> (by the angel) <i>at the Lord’s command</i>” (BDAG 756 s.v. <span class="greek">παρά</span> A.2).</p></p>
<p id="n42001146"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001146">146</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that there would be a fulfillment of what was said to her from the Lord.”</p><p><b>sn</b> This term speaks of completion of something planned (2 Chr 29:35).</p></p>
<p id="n42001147"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001147">147</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few witnesses, especially Latin <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, (a b l* Ir<sup>arm</sup> Or<sup>lat</sup> <span class="smcaps">mss</span> Nic) read “Elizabeth” here, since she was just speaking, but the ms evidence overwhelmingly supports “Mary” as the speaker.</p></p>
<p id="n42001148"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001148">148</a> <p><b>sn</b> The following passage has been typeset as poetry because many scholars regard this passage as poetic or hymnic. These terms are used broadly to refer to the genre of writing, not to the content. There are two broad criteria for determining if a passage is poetic or hymnic: “(a) <i>stylistic:</i> a certain rhythmical lilt when the passages are read aloud, the presence of <i>parallelismus membrorum</i> (i.e., an arrangement into couplets), the semblance of some metre, and the presence of rhetorical devices such as alliteration, <i>chiasmus</i>, and antithesis; and (b) <i>linguistic:</i> an unusual vocabulary, particularly the presence of theological terms, which is different from the surrounding context” (P. T. O’Brien, <i>Philippians</i> [NIGTC], 188-89). Classifying a passage as hymnic or poetic is important because understanding this genre can provide keys to interpretation. However, not all scholars agree that the above criteria are present in this passage, so the decision to typeset it as poetry should be viewed as a tentative decision about its genre.</p></p>
<p id="n42001149"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001149">149</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “lifts up the Lord in praise.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001150"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001150">150</a> <p><b>sn</b> This psalm (vv. 46-55) is one of the few praise psalms in the NT. Mary praises God and then tells why both in terms of his care for her (vv. 46-49) and for others, including Israel (vv. 50-55). Its traditional name, the “<i>Magnificat</i>,” comes from the Latin for the phrase <i>My soul magnifies the Lord</i> at the hymn’s start.</p></p>
<p id="n42001151"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001151">151</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rejoices.” The translation renders this aorist, which stands in contrast to the previous line’s present tense, as ingressive, which highlights Mary’s joyous reaction to the announcement. A comprehensive aorist is also possible here.</p></p>
<p id="n42001152"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001152">152</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servant” in v. 38.</p></p>
<p id="n42001153"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001153">153</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001154"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001154">154</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>From now on</i> is a favorite phrase of Luke’s, showing how God’s acts change things from this point on (5:10; 12:52; 22:18, 69; Acts 18:6).</p></p>
<p id="n42001155"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001155">155</a> <p><b>sn</b> Mary is seen here as an example of an object of God’s grace (<i>blessed</i>) for <i>all generations</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n42001156"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001156">156</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “the Mighty One.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001157"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001157">157</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and from.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated by a semicolon to improve the English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42001158"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001158">158</a> <p><b>sn</b> God’s mercy refers to his “loyal love” or “steadfast love,” expressed in faithful actions, as the rest of the psalm illustrates.</p></p>
<p id="n42001159"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001159">159</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “who revere.” This refers to those who show God a reverential respect for his sovereignty.</p></p>
<p id="n42001160"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001160">160</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “shown strength,” “performed powerful deeds.” The verbs here switch to aorist tense through 1:55. This is how God will act in general for his people as they look to his ultimate deliverance.</p></p>
<p id="n42001161"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001161">161</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the imaginations of their hearts.” The psalm rebukes the arrogance of the proud, who think that power is their sovereign right. Here <span class="greek">διανοίᾳ</span> (<span class="translit">dianoia</span>) can be understood as a dative of sphere or reference/respect.</p></p>
<p id="n42001162"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001162">162</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rulers.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001163"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001163">163</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “those of humble position”</p><p><b>sn</b> The contrast between <i>the mighty</i> and <i>those of lowly position</i> is fundamental for Luke. God cares for those that the powerful ignore (Luke 4:18-19).</p></p>
<p id="n42001164"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001164">164</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Good things</i> refers not merely to material blessings, but blessings that come from knowing God.</p></p>
<p id="n42001165"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001165">165</a> <p><b>sn</b> Another fundamental contrast of Luke’s is between <i>the hungry</i> and <i>the rich</i> (Luke 6:20-26).</p></p>
<p id="n42001166"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001166">166</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because he remembered mercy,” understanding the infinitive as causal.</p></p>
<p id="n42001167"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001167">167</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “his [God’s] loyal love.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001168"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001168">168</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as he spoke.” Since this is a reference to the covenant to Abraham, <span class="greek">ἐλάλησεν</span> (<span class="translit">elalēsen</span>) can be translated in context “as he promised.” God keeps his word.</p></p>
<p id="n42001169"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001169">169</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001170"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001170">170</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his seed” (an idiom for offspring or descendants).</p></p>
<p id="n42001171"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001171">171</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the conclusion of the topic.</p></p>
<p id="n42001172"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001172">172</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “her”; the referent (Elizabeth) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42001173"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001173">173</a> <p><b>sn</b> As is typical with Luke the timing is approximate (<i>about three months</i>), not specific.</p></p>
<p id="n42001174"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001174">174</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the time was fulfilled.” </p></p>
<p id="n42001175"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001175">175</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “her baby” are not in the Greek text, but have been supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42001176"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001176">176</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And her.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42001177"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001177">177</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “had magnified his mercy with her.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001178"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001178">178</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">συνέχαιρον</span> (<span class="translit">sunechairon</span>) is an imperfect and could be translated as an ingressive force, “they began to rejoice.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001179"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001179">179</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42001180"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001180">180</a> <p><b>sn</b> They were following OT law (Lev 12:3) which prescribed that a male child was to be circumcised <i>on the eighth day</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n42001181"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001181">181</a> <p><b>tn</b> This could be understood as a conative imperfect, expressing an unrealized desire (“they were trying to name him”). It has been given more of a voluntative nuance in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n42001182"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001182">182</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And,” but with clearly contrastive emphasis in context.</p></p>
<p id="n42001183"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001183">183</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his mother answering, said.” The combination of participle and finite verb is redundant in English and has been simplified to “replied” in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n42001184"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001184">184</a> <p><b>tn</b> This future passive indicative verb has imperatival force and thus has been translated “he must be named.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001185"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001185">185</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>No! He must be named John</i>.” By insisting on the name specified by the angel, Elizabeth (v. 60) and Zechariah (v. 63) have learned to obey God (see Luke 1:13).</p></p>
<p id="n42001186"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001186">186</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42001187"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001187">187</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “but” is not in the Greek text but has been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42001188"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001188">188</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “There is no one from your relatives who is called by this name.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001189"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001189">189</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the consequential nature of the action described.</p></p>
<p id="n42001190"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001190">190</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (the baby) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42001191"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001191">191</a> <p><b>sn</b> The crowd was sure there had been a mistake, so they appealed to the child’s <i>father</i>. But custom was not to be followed here, since God had spoken. The fact they needed to signal him (<i>made signs</i>) shows that he was deaf as well as unable to speak.</p></p>
<p id="n42001192"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001192">192</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “what he might wish to call him.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001193"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001193">193</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42001194"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001194">194</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>writing tablet</i> requested by Zechariah would have been a wax tablet.</p></p>
<p id="n42001195"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001195">195</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and wrote, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42001196"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001196">196</a> <p><b>sn</b> The response, <i>they were all amazed</i>, expresses a mixture of surprise and reflection in this setting where they were so certain of what the child’s name would be.</p></p>
<p id="n42001197"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001197">197</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And immediately.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42001198"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001198">198</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (Zechariah) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42001199"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001199">199</a> <p><b>sn</b> The mention of both <i>mouth</i> and <i>tongue</i> here is a figure called zeugma and emphasizes that the end of the temporary judgment came instantly and fully upon Zechariah’s expression of faith in naming the child. He had learned to trust and obey God during his short period of silence. He had learned from his trial.</p></p>
<p id="n42001200"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001200">200</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Released” is implied; in the Greek text both <span class="greek">στόμα</span> (<span class="translit">stoma</span>) and <span class="greek">γλῶσσα</span> (<span class="translit">glōssa</span>) are subjects of <span class="greek">ἀνεῴχθη</span> (<span class="translit">aneōchthē</span>), but this would be somewhat redundant in English.</p></p>
<p id="n42001201"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001201">201</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And all.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Fear</i> is the emotion that comes when one recognizes something unusual, even supernatural, has taken place.</p></p>
<p id="n42001202"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001202">202</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. A new sentence was begun at this point in the translation because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n42001203"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001203">203</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “heard”; the referent (these things, from the previous verse) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42001204"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001204">204</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “heart.” The term “heart” (<span class="greek">καρδία</span>, <span class="translit">kardia</span>) could also be translated as “mind,” or “thoughts,” and the entire phrase be rendered as “kept them in mind,” “thought about,” or the like. But the immediate context is clearly emotive, suggesting that much more is at work than merely the mental processes of thinking or reasoning about “these things.” There is a sense of joy and excitement (see the following question, “What then will this child be?”) and even fear. Further, the use of <span class="greek">καρδία</span> in 1:66 suggests connections with the same term in 2:19 where deep emotion is being expressed as well. Therefore, recognizing both the dramatic nature of the immediate context and the literary connections to 2:19, the translation renders the term in 1:66 as “hearts” to capture both the cognitive and emotive aspects of the people’s response.</p></p>
<p id="n42001205"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001205">205</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “what manner of child will this one be?”</p></p>
<p id="n42001206"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001206">206</a> <p><b>sn</b> The reference to <i>the Lord</i>’<i>s hand</i> indicates that the presence, direction, and favor of God was with him (Acts 7:9b).</p></p>
<p id="n42001207"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001207">207</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42001208"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001208">208</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he prophesied, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Prophesied</i>. The reference to prophecy reflects that Zechariah is enabled by the Spirit to speak God’s will. He does so in this case through a praise psalm, which calls for praise and then gives the reason why God should be praised. </p></p>
<p id="n42001209"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001209">209</a> <p><b>sn</b> The traditional name of this psalm, the “<i>Benedictus</i>,” comes from the Latin wording of the start of the hymn (“<i>Blessed be…</i>”).</p></p>
<p id="n42001210"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001210">210</a> <p><b>sn</b> The verb <i>come to help</i> can refer to a visit, but can also connote concern or assistance (L&amp;N 85.11).</p></p>
<p id="n42001211"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001211">211</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has delivered”; <i>Grk</i> “has accomplished redemption.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Has redeemed</i> is a reference to redemption, but it anticipates the total release into salvation that the full work of Messiah will bring for Israel. This involves both spiritual and material benefits eventually.</p></p>
<p id="n42001212"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001212">212</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and,” but specifying the reason for the praise in the psalm.</p></p>
<p id="n42001213"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001213">213</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>raised up</i> means for God to bring someone significant onto the scene of history.</p></p>
<p id="n42001214"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001214">214</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>horn of salvation</i> is a figure that refers to the power of Messiah and his ability to protect, as the horn refers to what an animal uses to attack and defend (Pss 75:4-5, 10; 148:14; 2 Sam 22:3). Thus the meaning of the figure is “a powerful savior.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001215"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001215">215</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>In the house of his servant David</i> is a reference to Messiah’s Davidic descent. Zechariah is more interested in Jesus than his own son John at this point.</p></p>
<p id="n42001216"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001216">216</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the ages,” “from eternity.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001217"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001217">217</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from long ago, salvation.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001218"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001218">218</a> <p><b>sn</b> The theme of being <i>saved from our enemies</i> is like the release Jesus preached in Luke 4:18-19. Luke’s narrative shows that one of the enemies in view is Satan and his cohorts, with the grip they have on humanity.</p></p>
<p id="n42001219"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001219">219</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “He has done this” (referring to the raising up of the horn of salvation from David’s house) are not in the Greek text, but are supplied to allow a new sentence to be started in the translation. The Greek sentence is lengthy and complex at this point, while contemporary English uses much shorter sentences.</p></p>
<p id="n42001220"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001220">220</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Mercy</i> refers to God’s loyal love (steadfast love) by which he completes his promises. See Luke 1:50.</p></p>
<p id="n42001221"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001221">221</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “our forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “our fathers.” This begins with the promise to Abraham (vv. 55, 73), and thus refers to many generations of ancestors.</p></p>
<p id="n42001222"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001222">222</a> <p><b>sn</b> The promises of God can be summarized as being found in the one promise (<i>the oath that he swore</i>) to Abraham (Gen 12:1-3).</p></p>
<p id="n42001223"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001223">223</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is linked back grammatically by apposition to “covenant” in v. 72, specifying which covenant is meant.</p></p>
<p id="n42001224"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001224">224</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forefather”; <i>Grk</i> “father.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001225"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001225">225</a> <p><b>tn</b> Again for reasons of English style, the infinitival clause “to grant us” has been translated “This oath grants” and made the beginning of a new sentence in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n42001226"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001226">226</a> <p><b>tc</b> Many significant early <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L W [0130] ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 565 892) lack “our,” while most (A C D [K] <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0177 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) supply it. Although the addition is most likely not authentic, “our” has been included in the translation due to English stylistic requirements.</p></p>
<p id="n42001227"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001227">227</a> <p><b>tn</b> This phrase in Greek is actually thrown forward to the front of the verse to give it emphasis.</p></p>
<p id="n42001228"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001228">228</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrases <i>that we…might serve him…in holiness and righteousness</i> from Luke 1:74-75 well summarize a basic goal for a believer in the eyes of Luke. Salvation frees us up to serve God without fear through a life full of ethical integrity.</p></p>
<p id="n42001229"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001229">229</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all our days.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001230"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001230">230</a> <p><b>sn</b> Now Zechariah describes his son John (<i>you, child</i>) through v. 77.</p></p>
<p id="n42001231"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001231">231</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a prophet,” but since Greek nouns can be definite without the article, and since in context this is a reference to the eschatological forerunner of the Messiah (cf. John 1:17), the concept is better conveyed to the English reader by the use of the definite article “the.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001232"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001232">232</a> <p><b>sn</b> In other words, John is a <i>prophet</i> of God; see 1:32 and 7:22-23, 28.</p></p>
<p id="n42001233"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001233">233</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially the later ones (A C D L <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0130 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy), have <span class="greek">πρὸ προσώπου κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">pro prosōpou kuriou</span>, “before the face of the Lord”), but the translation follows the reading <span class="greek">ἐνώπιον κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">enōpion kuriou</span>, “before the Lord”), which has earlier and better ms support (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>4</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B W 0177) and is thus more likely to be authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n42001234"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001234">234</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term is often translated in the singular, looking specifically to the forerunner role, but the plural suggests the many elements in that salvation.</p><p><b>sn</b> On the phrase <i>prepare his ways</i> see Isa 40:3-5 and Luke 3:1-6.</p></p>
<p id="n42001235"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001235">235</a> <p><b>sn</b> John’s role, <i>to give his people knowledge of salvation</i>, is similar to that of Jesus (Luke 3:1-14; 5:31-32).</p></p>
<p id="n42001236"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001236">236</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Forgiveness</i> is another major Lukan theme (Luke 4:18; 24:47; Acts 10:37).</p></p>
<p id="n42001237"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001237">237</a> <p><b>tn</b> For reasons of style, a new sentence has been started in the translation at this point. God’s mercy is ultimately seen in the deliverance John points to, so v. 78a is placed with the reference to Jesus as the light of dawning day.</p></p>
<p id="n42001238"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001238">238</a> <p><b>sn</b> God’s loyal love (steadfast love) is again the topic, reflected in the phrase <i>tender mercy</i>; see Luke 1:72.</p></p>
<p id="n42001239"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001239">239</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek term translated <i>dawn</i> (<span class="greek">ἀνατολή</span>, <span class="translit">anatolē</span>) can be a reference to the morning star or to the sun. The Messiah is pictured as a saving light that shows the way. The Greek term was also used to translate the Hebrew word for “branch” or “sprout,” so some see a double entendre here with messianic overtones (see Isa 11:1-10; Jer 23:5; 33:15; Zech 3:8; 6:12).</p></p>
<p id="n42001240"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001240">240</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “shall visit us.” </p></p>
<p id="n42001241"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001241">241</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the phrases <i>who sit in darkness…and…death</i> see Isa 9:1-2; 42:7; 49:9-10.</p></p>
<p id="n42001242"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001242">242</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the path.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001243"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001243">243</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb is imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n42001244"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001244">244</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb is also imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n42001245"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001245">245</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert.”</p></p>
<p id="n42001246"><a href="file1016.xhtml#n42001246">246</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “until the day of his revealing.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
