<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 9</h2>
<p id="n450091"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n450091">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Rom 9:1-11:36</i>. These three chapters are among the most difficult and disputed in Paul’s Letter to the Romans. One area of difficulty is the relationship between Israel and the church, especially concerning the nature and extent of Israel’s election. Many different models have been constructed to express this relationship. For a representative survey, see M. Barth, <i>The People of God</i> (JSNTSup), 22-27. The literary genre of these three chapters has been frequently identified as a diatribe, a philosophical discussion or conversation evolved by the Cynic and Stoic schools of philosophy as a means of popularizing their ideas (E. Käsemann, <i>Romans</i>, 261 and 267). But other recent scholars have challenged the idea that Rom 9-11 is characterized by diatribe. Scholars like R. Scroggs and E. E. Ellis have instead identified the material in question as midrash. For a summary and discussion of the rabbinic connections, see W. R. Stegner, “Romans 9.6-29—A Midrash,” <i>JSNT</i> 22 (1984): 37-52.</p></p>
<p id="n450092"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n450092">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “my conscience bears witness to me.”</p></p>
<p id="n450093"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n450093">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my sorrow is great and the anguish in my heart is unceasing.”</p></p>
<p id="n450094"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n450094">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “For I would pray.” The implied condition is “if this could save my fellow Jews.”</p></p>
<p id="n450095"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n450095">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See BDAG 18-19 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 2.b.</p></p>
<p id="n450096"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n450096">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my kinsmen according to the flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n450097"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n450097">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of whom.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n450098"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n450098">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">υἱοθεσία</span> (<span class="translit">huiothesia</span>) was originally a legal technical term for adoption as a son with full rights of inheritance. BDAG 1024 s.v. notes, “a legal t.t. of ‘adoption’ of children, in our lit., i.e., in Paul, only in a transferred sense of a transcendent filial relationship between God and humans (with the legal aspect, not gender specificity, as major semantic component).” Although some modern translations remove the filial sense completely and render the term merely “adoption” (cf. NAB, ESV), the retention of this component of meaning was accomplished in the present translation by the phrase “as sons.”</p></p>
<p id="n450099"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n450099">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “cultic service.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500910"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of whom are the fathers.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4500911"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500911">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from whom.” Here the relative pronoun has been replaced by a personal pronoun.</p></p>
<p id="n4500912"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500912">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to the flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500913"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500913">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah.” (Both Greek “Christ” and Hebrew and Aramaic “Messiah” mean “one who has been anointed.”)</p></p>
<p id="n4500914"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500914">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Christ, who is over all, God blessed forever,” or “the Messiah. God who is over all be blessed forever!” or “the Messiah who is over all. God be blessed forever!” The translational difficulty here is not text-critical in nature, but is a problem of punctuation. Since the genre of these opening verses of Romans 9 is a lament, it is probably best to take this as an affirmation of Christ’s deity (as the text renders it). Although the other renderings are possible, to see a note of praise to God at the end of this section seems strangely out of place. But for Paul to bring his lament to a crescendo (that is to say, his kinsmen had rejected <i>God</i> come in the flesh), thereby deepening his anguish, is wholly appropriate. This is also supported grammatically and stylistically: The phrase <span class="greek">ὁ ὢν</span> (<span class="translit">ho ōn</span>, “the one who is”) is most naturally taken as a phrase which modifies something in the preceding context, and Paul’s doxologies are always closely tied to the preceding context. For a detailed examination of this verse, see B. M. Metzger, “The Punctuation of Rom. 9:5, ” <i>Christ and the Spirit in the New Testament</i>, 95-112; and M. J. Harris, <i>Jesus as God</i>, 144-72.</p></p>
<p id="n4500915"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500915">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For not all those who are from Israel are Israel.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500916"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500916">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “be called.” The emphasis here is upon God’s divine sovereignty in choosing Isaac as the child through whom Abraham’s lineage would be counted as opposed to Ishmael.</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 21:12.</p></p>
<p id="n4500917"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “That is,” or “That is to say.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500918"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500918">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because it forms the counterpoint to “the children of promise” the expression “children of the flesh” has been retained in the translation.</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>the children of the flesh</i> refers to the natural offspring. </p></p>
<p id="n4500919"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For this is the word of promise.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500920"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500920">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “About this time I will return.” Since this refers to the time when the promised child would be born, it would be approximately a year later.</p></p>
<p id="n4500921"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500921">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 18:10, 14.</p></p>
<p id="n4500922"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500922">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “by one act of sexual intercourse.” See D. Moo, <i>Romans</i> (NICNT), 579.</p></p>
<p id="n4500923"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500923">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God’s purpose according to election.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500924"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500924">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “not based on works but based on…”</p></p>
<p id="n4500925"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500925">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the one who calls.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The entire clause is something of a parenthetical remark.</p></p>
<p id="n4500926"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500926">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> Many translations place this verse division before the phrase “not by works but by his calling” (NA<sup>28</sup>/UBS<sup>5</sup>, NIV, NRSV, NLT, NAB). Other translations place this verse division in the same place that the translation above does (NASB, KJV, NKJV, ASV, RSV). The translation has followed the latter to avoid breaking the parenthetical statement.</p></p>
<p id="n4500927"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500927">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 25:23.</p></p>
<p id="n4500928"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500928">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Mal 1:2-3.</p></p>
<p id="n4500929"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500929">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 33:19.</p></p>
<p id="n4500930"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500930">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is a double connective here that cannot be easily preserved in English: “consequently therefore,” emphasizing the conclusion of what he has been arguing.</p></p>
<p id="n4500931"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500931">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So then, [it does] not [depend] on the one who desires nor on the one who runs.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500932"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500932">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul uses a typical rabbinic formula here in which the OT scriptures are figuratively portrayed as speaking <i>to Pharaoh</i>. What he means is that the scripture he cites refers (or can be applied) to Pharaoh.</p></p>
<p id="n4500933"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500933">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 9:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4500934"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500934">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is a double connective here that cannot be easily preserved in English: “consequently therefore,” emphasizing the conclusion of what he has been arguing.</p></p>
<p id="n4500935"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500935">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4500936"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500936">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So then, he has mercy on whom he desires, and he hardens whom he desires.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500937"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500937">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O man.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500938"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500938">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “On the contrary, O man, who are you to talk back to God?”</p></p>
<p id="n4500939"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500939">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 29:16; 45:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4500940"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500940">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Or does not the potter have authority over the clay to make from the same lump.” </p></p>
<p id="n4500941"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500941">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “one vessel for honor and another for dishonor.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500942"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500942">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “vessels.” This is the same Greek word used in v. 21.</p></p>
<p id="n4500943"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500943">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “vessels destined for wrath.” The genitive <span class="greek">ὀργῆς</span> (<span class="translit">orgēs</span>) could be taken as a genitive of destination.</p></p>
<p id="n4500944"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500944">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “objects of wrath that have fit themselves for destruction.” The form of the participle could be taken either as a passive or middle (reflexive). <i>ExSyn</i> 417-18 argues strongly for the passive sense (which is followed in the translation), stating that “the middle view has little to commend it.” First, <span class="greek">καταρτίζω</span> (<span class="translit">katartizō</span>) is nowhere else used in the NT as a direct or reflexive middle (a usage which, in any event, is quite rare in the NT). Second, the lexical force of this verb, coupled with the perfect tense, suggests something of a “done deal” (against some commentaries that see these vessels as <i>ready</i> for destruction yet still able to avert disaster). Third, the potter-clay motif seems to have one point: The potter prepares the clay.</p></p>
<p id="n4500945"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500945">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “vessels.” This is the same Greek word used in v. 21.</p></p>
<p id="n4500946"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500946">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and her who was not beloved, ‘Beloved.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4500947"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500947">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Hos 2:23.</p></p>
<p id="n4500948"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500948">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it will be in the very place.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500949"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500949">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Hos 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4500950"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500950">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sons.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500951"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500951">51</a> <p><b>tc</b> In light of the interpretive difficulty of this verse, a longer reading seems to have been added to clarify the meaning. The addition, in the middle of the sentence, makes the whole verse read as follows: “For he will execute his sentence completely and quickly in righteousness, because the Lord will do it quickly on the earth.” The shorter reading is found largely in Alexandrian <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B 6 1506 1739 1881 co), while the longer reading is found principally in Western and Byzantine <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1241 1505 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat). The longer reading follows Isa 10:22-23 (LXX) verbatim, while Paul in the previous verse quoted the LXX loosely. This suggests the addition was made by a copyist trying to make sense out of a difficult passage rather than by the author himself. </p><p><b>tn</b> There is a wordplay in Greek (in both the LXX and here) on the phrase translated “completely and quickly” (<span class="greek">συντελῶν καὶ συντέμνων</span>, <span class="translit">suntelōn kai suntemnōn</span>). These participles are translated as adverbs for smoothness; a more literal (and more cumbersome) rendering would be: “The Lord will act by closing the account [or completing the sentence], and by cutting short the time.” The interpretation of this text is notoriously difficult. Cf. BDAG 975 s.v. <span class="greek">συντέμνω</span>.</p><p><b>sn</b> A modified quotation from Isa 10:22-23. Since it is not exact, it has been printed as italics only.</p></p>
<p id="n4500952"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500952">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4500953"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500953">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “Lord of Hosts”; or “Lord Sabaoth,” which means “Lord of the [heavenly] armies,” sometimes translated more generally as “Lord Almighty.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500954"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500954">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 1:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4500955"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500955">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who pursued.” The participle could be taken adverbially or adjectivally.</p></p>
<p id="n4500956"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500956">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a legal righteousness,” that is, a righteousness based on law. This translation would treat the genitive <span class="greek">δικαιοσύνης</span> (<span class="translit">dikaiosunēs</span>) as an attributed genitive (see <i>ExSyn</i> 89-91).</p></p>
<p id="n4500957"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500957">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has not attained unto the law.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500958"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500958">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Why? Because not by faith but as though by works.” The verb (“they pursued [it]”) is to be supplied from the preceding verse for the sake of English style; yet a certain literary power is seen in Paul’s laconic style.</p></p>
<p id="n4500959"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500959">59</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially the later ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1241 1505 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy), read <span class="greek">νόμου</span> (<span class="translit">nomou</span>, “of the law”) here, echoing Paul’s usage in Rom 3:20, 28 and elsewhere. The qualifying phrase is lacking in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B F G 6 629 630 1739 1881 lat co. The longer reading thus is weaker externally and internally, apparently being motivated by a need to clarify.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but as by works.” </p></p>
<p id="n4500960"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500960">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the stone of stumbling.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500961"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500961">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500962"><a href="file1100.xhtml#n4500962">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 28:16; 8:14.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
