<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 23</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 23</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Seven Woes </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:1</span> Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples, <span class="verse">23:2</span> “The<sup><a id="n400231" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n400231">1</a></sup> experts in the law<sup><a id="n400232" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n400232">2</a></sup> and the Pharisees<sup><a id="n400233" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n400233">3</a></sup> sit on Moses’ seat. <span class="verse">23:3</span> Therefore pay attention to what they tell you and do it. But do not do what they do, for they do not practice what they teach.<sup><a id="n400234" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n400234">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">23:4</span> They<sup><a id="n400235" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n400235">5</a></sup> tie up heavy loads, hard to carry, and put them on men’s shoulders, but they themselves are not willing even to lift a finger to move them. <span class="verse">23:5</span> They<sup><a id="n400236" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n400236">6</a></sup> do all their deeds to be seen by people, for they make their phylacteries<sup><a id="n400237" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n400237">7</a></sup> wide and their tassels<sup><a id="n400238" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n400238">8</a></sup> long. <span class="verse">23:6</span> They<sup><a id="n400239" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n400239">9</a></sup> love the place of honor at banquets and the best seats in the synagogues<sup><a id="n4002310" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002310">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">23:7</span> and elaborate greetings<sup><a id="n4002311" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002311">11</a></sup> in the marketplaces,<sup><a id="n4002312" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002312">12</a></sup> and to have people call them ‘Rabbi.’ <span class="verse">23:8</span> But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi,’ for you have one Teacher and you are all brothers. <span class="verse">23:9</span> And call no one your ‘father’ on earth, for you have one Father, who is in heaven. <span class="verse">23:10</span> Nor are you to be called ‘teacher,’ for you have one teacher, the Christ.<sup><a id="n4002313" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002313">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">23:11</span> The<sup><a id="n4002314" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002314">14</a></sup> greatest among you will be your servant. <span class="verse">23:12</span> And whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:13</span> “But woe to you, experts in the law<sup><a id="n4002315" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002315">15</a></sup> and you Pharisees, hypocrites!<sup><a id="n4002316" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002316">16</a></sup> You keep locking people out of the kingdom of heaven!<sup><a id="n4002317" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002317">17</a></sup> For you neither enter nor permit those trying to enter to go in.<sup><a id="n4002318" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002318">18</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:15</span> “Woe to you, experts in the law<sup><a id="n4002319" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002319">19</a></sup> and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You cross land and sea to make one convert,<sup><a id="n4002320" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002320">20</a></sup> and when you get one,<sup><a id="n4002321" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002321">21</a></sup> you make him twice as much a child of hell<sup><a id="n4002322" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002322">22</a></sup> as yourselves! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:16</span> “Woe to you, blind guides, who say, ‘Whoever swears by the temple is bound by nothing.<sup><a id="n4002323" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002323">23</a></sup> But whoever swears by the gold of the temple is bound by the oath.’ <span class="verse">23:17</span> Blind fools! Which is greater, the gold or the temple that makes the gold sacred? <span class="verse">23:18</span> And, ‘Whoever swears by the altar is bound by nothing.<sup><a id="n4002324" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002324">24</a></sup> But if anyone swears by the gift on it he is bound by the oath.’ <span class="verse">23:19</span> You are blind! For which is greater, the gift or the altar that makes the gift sacred? <span class="verse">23:20</span> So whoever swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it. <span class="verse">23:21</span> And whoever swears by the temple swears by it and the one who dwells in it. <span class="verse">23:22</span> And whoever swears by heaven swears by the throne of God and the one who sits on it. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:23</span> “Woe to you, experts in the law<sup><a id="n4002325" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002325">25</a></sup> and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You give a tenth<sup><a id="n4002326" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002326">26</a></sup> of mint, dill, and cumin,<sup><a id="n4002327" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002327">27</a></sup> yet you neglect what is more important in the law—justice, mercy, and faithfulness! You<sup><a id="n4002328" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002328">28</a></sup> should have done these things without neglecting the others. <span class="verse">23:24</span> Blind guides! You strain out a gnat yet swallow a camel!<sup><a id="n4002329" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002329">29</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:25</span> “Woe to you, experts in the law<sup><a id="n4002330" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002330">30</a></sup> and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You clean the outside of the cup and the dish, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence. <span class="verse">23:26</span> Blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup,<sup><a id="n4002331" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002331">31</a></sup> so that the outside may become clean too!</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:27</span> “Woe to you, experts in the law<sup><a id="n4002332" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002332">32</a></sup> and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You are like whitewashed tombs<sup><a id="n4002333" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002333">33</a></sup> that look beautiful on the outside but inside are full of the bones of the dead and of everything unclean. <span class="verse">23:28</span> In the same way, on the outside you look righteous to people, but inside you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:29</span> “Woe to you, experts in the law<sup><a id="n4002334" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002334">34</a></sup> and you Pharisees, hypocrites! You<sup><a id="n4002335" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002335">35</a></sup> build tombs for the prophets and decorate the graves<sup><a id="n4002336" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002336">36</a></sup> of the righteous. <span class="verse">23:30</span> And you say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our ancestors,<sup><a id="n4002337" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002337">37</a></sup> we would not have participated with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’ <span class="verse">23:31</span> By saying this you testify against yourselves that you are descendants of those who murdered the prophets. <span class="verse">23:32</span> Fill up then the measure of your ancestors! <span class="verse">23:33</span> You snakes, you offspring of vipers! How will you escape being condemned to hell?<sup><a id="n4002338" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002338">38</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:34</span> “For this reason I<sup><a id="n4002339" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002339">39</a></sup> am sending you prophets and wise men and experts in the law,<sup><a id="n4002340" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002340">40</a></sup> some of whom you will kill and crucify,<sup><a id="n4002341" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002341">41</a></sup> and some you will flog<sup><a id="n4002342" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002342">42</a></sup> in your synagogues<sup><a id="n4002343" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002343">43</a></sup> and pursue from town to town, <span class="verse">23:35</span> so that on you will come all the righteous blood shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Barachiah,<sup><a id="n4002344" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002344">44</a></sup> whom you murdered between the temple and the altar. <span class="verse">23:36</span> I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4002345" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002345">45</a></sup> this generation will be held responsible for all these things!<sup><a id="n4002346" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002346">46</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Judgment on Israel </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">23:37</span> “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,<sup><a id="n4002347" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002347">47</a></sup> you who kill the prophets and stone those who are sent to you!<sup><a id="n4002348" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002348">48</a></sup> How often I have longed<sup><a id="n4002349" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002349">49</a></sup> to gather your children together as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but<sup><a id="n4002350" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002350">50</a></sup> you would have none of it!<sup><a id="n4002351" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002351">51</a></sup> <span class="verse">23:38</span> Look, your house is left to you desolate! <span class="verse">23:39</span> For I tell you, you will not see me from now until you say, ‘<b><i>Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!</i></b>’”<sup><a id="n4002352" href="file992_notes.xhtml#n4002352">52</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>