<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Timothy 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Timothy<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul,<sup><a id="n540011" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n540011">1</a></sup> an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior<sup><a id="n540012" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n540012">2</a></sup> and of Christ Jesus our hope, <span class="verse">1:2</span> to Timothy, my genuine child in the faith. Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Timothy’s Task in Ephesus</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:3</span> As I urged you when I was leaving for Macedonia, stay on in Ephesus to instruct<sup><a id="n540014" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n540014">4</a></sup> certain people not to spread false teachings,<sup><a id="n540015" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n540015">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:4</span> nor to occupy themselves with myths and interminable genealogies.<sup><a id="n540016" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n540016">6</a></sup> Such things promote useless speculations rather than God’s redemptive plan<sup><a id="n540017" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n540017">7</a></sup> that operates by faith. <span class="verse">1:5</span> But the aim of our instruction<sup><a id="n540018" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n540018">8</a></sup> is love that comes from a pure heart, a good conscience, and a sincere faith.<sup><a id="n540019" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n540019">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:6</span> Some have strayed from these and turned away to empty discussion. <span class="verse">1:7</span> They want to be teachers of the law, but they do not understand what they are saying or the things they insist on so confidently.<sup><a id="n5400110" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400110">10</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:8</span> But we know that the law is good if someone uses it legitimately, <span class="verse">1:9</span> realizing that law<sup><a id="n5400111" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400111">11</a></sup> is not intended for a righteous person, but for lawless and rebellious people, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for those who kill their fathers or mothers, for murderers, <span class="verse">1:10</span> sexually immoral people, practicing homosexuals,<sup><a id="n5400112" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400112">12</a></sup> kidnappers, liars, perjurers—in fact, for any who live contrary to sound teaching. <span class="verse">1:11</span> This<sup><a id="n5400113" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400113">13</a></sup> accords with the glorious gospel of the blessed God<sup><a id="n5400114" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400114">14</a></sup> that was entrusted to me.<sup><a id="n5400115" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400115">15</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:12</span> I am grateful to the one who has strengthened me, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he considered me faithful in putting me into ministry, <span class="verse">1:13</span> even though I was formerly a blasphemer and a persecutor, and an arrogant<sup><a id="n5400116" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400116">16</a></sup> man. But I was treated with mercy because I acted ignorantly in unbelief, <span class="verse">1:14</span> and our Lord’s grace was abundant, bringing faith and love in Christ Jesus.<sup><a id="n5400117" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400117">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:15</span> This saying<sup><a id="n5400118" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400118">18</a></sup> is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance: “Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners”—and I am the worst of them!<sup><a id="n5400119" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400119">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:16</span> But here is why I was treated with mercy: so that<sup><a id="n5400120" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400120">20</a></sup> in me as the worst,<sup><a id="n5400121" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400121">21</a></sup> Christ Jesus could demonstrate his utmost patience, as an example for those who are going to believe in him for eternal life. <span class="verse">1:17</span> Now to the eternal king,<sup><a id="n5400122" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400122">22</a></sup> immortal, invisible, the only<sup><a id="n5400123" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400123">23</a></sup> God, be honor and glory forever and ever!<sup><a id="n5400124" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400124">24</a></sup> Amen. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:18</span> I put this charge<sup><a id="n5400125" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400125">25</a></sup> before you, Timothy my child, in keeping with the prophecies once spoken about you,<sup><a id="n5400126" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400126">26</a></sup> in order that with such encouragement<sup><a id="n5400127" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400127">27</a></sup> you may fight the good fight. <span class="verse">1:19</span> To do this<sup><a id="n5400128" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400128">28</a></sup> you must hold firmly to faith and a good conscience, which some have rejected and so have suffered shipwreck in regard to the faith. <span class="verse">1:20</span> Among these are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I handed over to Satan<sup><a id="n5400129" href="file1174_notes.xhtml#n5400129">29</a></sup> to be taught not to blaspheme. </p>

</body>
</html>