<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Revelation 22</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Revelation<br />Chapter 22</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:1</span> Then<sup><a id="n660221" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n660221">1</a></sup> the angel<sup><a id="n660222" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n660222">2</a></sup> showed me the river of the water of life—water as clear as crystal—pouring out<sup><a id="n660223" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n660223">3</a></sup> from the throne of God and of the Lamb, <span class="verse">22:2</span> flowing down the middle of the city’s<sup><a id="n660224" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n660224">4</a></sup> main street.<sup><a id="n660225" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n660225">5</a></sup> On each side<sup><a id="n660226" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n660226">6</a></sup> of the river is the tree of life producing twelve kinds<sup><a id="n660227" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n660227">7</a></sup> of fruit, yielding its fruit every month of the year.<sup><a id="n660228" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n660228">8</a></sup> Its leaves are for the healing of the nations. <span class="verse">22:3</span> And there will no longer be any curse,<sup><a id="n660229" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n660229">9</a></sup> and the throne of God and the Lamb will be in the city.<sup><a id="n6602210" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602210">10</a></sup> His<sup><a id="n6602211" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602211">11</a></sup> servants<sup><a id="n6602212" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602212">12</a></sup> will worship<sup><a id="n6602213" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602213">13</a></sup> him, <span class="verse">22:4</span> and they will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads. <span class="verse">22:5</span> Night will be no more, and they will not need the light of a lamp or the light of the sun, because the Lord God will shine on them, and they will reign forever and ever. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Final Reminder</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:6</span> Then<sup><a id="n6602214" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602214">14</a></sup> the angel<sup><a id="n6602215" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602215">15</a></sup> said to me, “These words are reliable<sup><a id="n6602216" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602216">16</a></sup> and true. The Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, has sent his angel to show his servants<sup><a id="n6602217" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602217">17</a></sup> what must happen soon.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:7</span> (Look ! I am coming soon!</p>
<p class="poetry">Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy expressed in this book.)<sup><a id="n6602218" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602218">18</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:8</span> I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things,<sup><a id="n6602219" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602219">19</a></sup> and when I heard and saw them,<sup><a id="n6602220" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602220">20</a></sup> I threw myself down<sup><a id="n6602221" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602221">21</a></sup> to worship at the feet of the angel who was showing them to me. <span class="verse">22:9</span> But<sup><a id="n6602222" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602222">22</a></sup> he said to me, “Do not do this!<sup><a id="n6602223" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602223">23</a></sup> I am a fellow servant<sup><a id="n6602224" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602224">24</a></sup> with you and with your brothers the prophets, and with those who obey<sup><a id="n6602225" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602225">25</a></sup> the words of this book. Worship God!” <span class="verse">22:10</span> Then<sup><a id="n6602226" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602226">26</a></sup> he said to me, “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy contained in this book, because the time is near. <span class="verse">22:11</span> The evildoer must continue to do evil,<sup><a id="n6602227" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602227">27</a></sup> and the one who is morally filthy<sup><a id="n6602228" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602228">28</a></sup> must continue to be filthy. The<sup><a id="n6602229" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602229">29</a></sup> one who is righteous must continue to act righteously, and the one who is holy must continue to be holy.” </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:12</span> (Look ! I am coming soon, </p>
<p class="poetry">and my reward is with me to pay<sup><a id="n6602230" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602230">30</a></sup> each one according to what he has done! </p>
<p class="poetry"><span class="verse">22:13</span> I am the Alpha and the Omega, </p>
<p class="poetry">the first and the last, </p>
<p class="poetry">the beginning and the end!)<sup><a id="n6602231" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602231">31</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:14</span> Blessed are those who wash their robes so they can have access<sup><a id="n6602232" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602232">32</a></sup> to the tree of life and can enter into the city by the gates. <span class="verse">22:15</span> Outside are the dogs and the sorcerers<sup><a id="n6602233" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602233">33</a></sup> and the sexually immoral, and the murderers, and the idolaters and everyone who loves and practices falsehood!<sup><a id="n6602234" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602234">34</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:16</span> “I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify to you about these things for the churches. I am the root and the descendant of David, the bright morning star!”<sup><a id="n6602235" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602235">35</a></sup> <span class="verse">22:17</span> And the Spirit and the bride say, “Come!” And let the one who hears say: “Come!” And let the one who is thirsty come; let the one who wants it take the water of life free of charge. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:18</span> I testify to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy contained in this book: If anyone adds to them, God will add to him the plagues described<sup><a id="n6602236" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602236">36</a></sup> in this book. <span class="verse">22:19</span> And if anyone takes away from the words of this book of prophecy, God will take away his share in the tree of life<sup><a id="n6602237" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602237">37</a></sup> and in the holy city that are described in this book. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">22:20</span> The one who testifies to these things says, “Yes, I am coming soon!” Amen! Come, Lord Jesus! <span class="verse">22:21</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all.<sup><a id="n6602238" href="file1255_notes.xhtml#n6602238">38</a></sup> </p>
</body>
</html>