<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 13</h2>
<p id="n420131"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n420131">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic. </p></p>
<p id="n420132"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n420132">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is an event that otherwise is unattested, though several events similar to it are noted in Josephus (<i>J. W</i>. 2.9.2-4 [2.169-177]; <i>Ant</i>. 13.13.5 [13.372-73], 18.3.1-2 [18.55-62]; 18.4.1 [18.85-87]). It would have caused a major furor.</p></p>
<p id="n420133"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n420133">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic. </p></p>
<p id="n420134"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n420134">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus did not want his hearers to think that tragedy was necessarily a judgment on these people because they were <i>worse sinners</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n420135"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n420135">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus was stressing that all stand at risk of death, if they do not <i>repent</i> and receive life.</p></p>
<p id="n420136"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n420136">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you will all likewise perish,” but this could be misunderstood to mean that they would perish by the same means as the Galileans. Jesus’ point is that apart from repentance all will perish.</p></p>
<p id="n420137"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n420137">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them.” This relative clause embedded in a prepositional phrase is complex in English and has been simplified to an adjectival and a temporal clause in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n420138"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n420138">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> Unlike the previous event, <i>when the tower in Siloam fell on them</i>, it was an accident of fate. It raised the question, however, “Was this a judgment?”</p></p>
<p id="n4201310"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201310">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ point repeats v. 3. The circumstances make no difference. All must deal with the reality of what death means.</p></p>
<p id="n4201311"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “similarly.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201312"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201313"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201314"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201314">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>fig tree</i> is a variation on the picture of a vine as representing the nation; see Isa 5:1-7.</p></p>
<p id="n4201315"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the man’s response as a result of the lack of figs in the preceding clause. </p></p>
<p id="n4201316"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold, for.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201317"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201317">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> The elapsed time could be six years total since planting, since often a fig was given <i>three years</i> before one even started to look for fruit. The point in any case is that enough time had been given to expect fruit.</p></p>
<p id="n4201318"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “each time I inspect it” is not in the Greek text but has been supplied to indicate the customary nature of the man’s search for fruit.</p></p>
<p id="n4201319"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201319">19</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> A L <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 070 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 579 892 <i>al</i> lat co) have “therefore” (<span class="greek">οὖν</span>, <span class="translit">oun</span>) here. This conjunction has the effect of strengthening the logical connection with the preceding statement but also of reducing the rhetorical power and urgency of the imperative. In light of the slightly greater internal probability of adding a conjunction to an otherwise asyndetic sentence, as well as significant external support for the omission (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D W ƒ<sup>1</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>), the shorter reading appears to be more likely as the earlier wording here. NA<sup>28</sup> puts the conjunction in brackets, indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201320"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Why indeed.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201321"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201321">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> Such fig trees would <i>deplete the soil</i>, robbing it of nutrients needed by other trees and plants.</p></p>
<p id="n4201322"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the worker who tended the vineyard) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201323"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “toss manure [on it].” This is a reference to manure used as fertilizer.</p></p>
<p id="n4201324"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a third class condition in the Greek text. The conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, a component of <span class="greek">κάν</span> [<span class="translit">kan</span>]) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201325"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the coming [season].”</p></p>
<p id="n4201326"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “very well” is supplied in the translation to complete the elided idea, but its absence is telling.</p></p>
<p id="n4201327"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a first class condition in the Greek text, showing which of the options is assumed.</p></p>
<p id="n4201328"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201328">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogues</i> in 4:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4201329"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and behold, a woman.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4201330"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201330">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a woman having a spirit of weakness” (or “a spirit of infirmity”).</p></p>
<p id="n4201331"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201331">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “years, and.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201332"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201332">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and could not straighten herself up at all.” If <span class="greek">εἰς τὸ παντελές</span> (<span class="translit">eis to panteles</span>) is understood to modify <span class="greek">δυναμένη</span> (<span class="translit">dunamenē</span>), the meaning is “she was not able at all to straighten herself up,” but the phrase may be taken with <span class="greek">ἀνακύψαι</span> (<span class="translit">anakupsai</span>) and understood to mean the same as the adverb <span class="greek">παντελῶς</span> (<span class="translit">pantelōs</span>), with the meaning “she was not able to straighten herself up completely.” See BDAG 754 s.v. <span class="greek">παντελής</span> 1 for further discussion. The second option is preferred in the translation because of proximity: The phrase in question follows <span class="greek">ἀνακύψαι</span> in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n4201333"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201333">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἰδών</span> (<span class="translit">idōn</span>) has been taken temporally. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201334"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201334">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">προσεφώνησεν</span> (<span class="translit">prosephōnēsen</span>) has been translated as “called (her) to (him),” with the direct object (“her”) and the indirect object (“him”) both understood.</p></p>
<p id="n4201335"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201335">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Woman</i> was a polite form of address (see BDAG 208-9 s.v. <span class="greek">γυνή</span>), similar to “Madam” or “Ma’am” used in English in different regions.</p></p>
<p id="n4201336"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201336">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “released.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201337"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201337">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sickness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201338"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201338">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201339"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201339">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> The healing took place <i>immediately</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4201340"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201340">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> The irony is that Jesus’ “<i>work</i>” consisted of merely touching the woman. There is no sense of joy that eighteen years of suffering was reversed with his touch.</p></p>
<p id="n4201341"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201341">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on which it is necessary to work.” This has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201342"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201342">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἐρχόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">erchomenoi</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201343"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201343">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered him and said.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been shortened to “answered him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201344"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201344">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the manger [feeding trough],” but by metonymy of part for whole this can be rendered “stall.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201345"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201345">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> The charge here is hypocrisy, but it is only part one of the response. Various ancient laws detail what was allowed with cattle; see Mishnah, <i>m. Shabbat</i> 5; CD 11:5-6.</p></p>
<p id="n4201346"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201346">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to show the connection with Jesus’ previous statement.</p></p>
<p id="n4201347"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201347">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is it not necessary that.” Jesus argues that no other day is more appropriate to heal a descendant of Abraham than the Sabbath, the exact opposite view of the synagogue leader.</p></p>
<p id="n4201348"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201348">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note that this is again a battle between <i>Satan</i> and God; see 11:18-23.</p></p>
<p id="n4201349"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201349">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “long” reflects the emphasis added in the Greek text by <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>). See BDAG 468 s.v. 1.</p></p>
<p id="n4201350"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201350">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bondage”; <i>Grk</i> “bond.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201351"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201351">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. </p></p>
<p id="n4201352"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201352">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “were put to shame.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201353"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201353">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201354"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201354">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> Concerning <i>all the wonderful things</i> see Luke 7:16; 19:37.</p></p>
<p id="n4201355"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201355">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that were being done by him.” The passive has been converted to an active construction in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201356"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201356">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201357"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201357">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said,” but what follows is a question.</p></p>
<p id="n4201358"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201358">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n4201359"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201359">59</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>What is the kingdom of God like?</i> Unlike Mark 4 or Matt 13, where the kingdom parables tend to be all in one location in the narrative, Luke scatters his examples throughout the Gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n4201360"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201360">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And to.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201361"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201361">61</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>mustard seed</i> was noted for its tiny size.</p></p>
<p id="n4201362"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201362">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “threw.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201363"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201363">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “garden, and it.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201364"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201364">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> Calling the mustard plant a <i>tree</i> is rhetorical hyperbole, since technically it is not one. This plant could be one of two types of mustard popular in Palestine and would be either 10 or 25 ft (3 or 7.5 m) tall.</p></p>
<p id="n4201365"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201365">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the birds of the sky” or “the birds of the heaven”; the Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) may be translated either “sky” or “heaven,” depending on the context. The idiomatic expression “birds of the sky” refers to wild birds as opposed to domesticated fowl (cf. BDAG 809 s.v. <span class="greek">πετεινόν</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4201366"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201366">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of the parable seems to be that while the kingdom of God may appear to have insignificant and unnoticeable beginnings (i.e., in the ministry of Jesus), it will someday (i.e., at the second advent) be great and quite expansive. The kingdom, however, is not to be equated with the church, but rather the church is an expression of the kingdom. Also, there is important OT background in the image of a small plant that <i>grew and became a tree</i>: Ezek 17:22-24 pictures the reemergence of the Davidic house where people can find calm and shelter. Like the mustard seed, it would start out small but grow to significant size.</p></p>
<p id="n4201367"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201367">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And again.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201368"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201368">68</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. See the note on this phrase in v. 18.</p></p>
<p id="n4201369"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201369">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hid in.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201370"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201370">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>measure</i> was a saton, the Greek name for the Hebrew term “seah.” Three of these was a very large quantity of flour, since a saton is a little over 16 lbs (7 kg) of dry measure (or 13.13 liters). So this was over 47 lbs (21 kg) of flour total, enough to feed over a hundred people.</p></p>
<p id="n4201371"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201371">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it was all leavened.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The parable of the <i>yeast</i> and <i>the dough</i> teaches that the kingdom of God will start small but eventually grow to permeate everything. Jesus’ point was not to be deceived by its seemingly small start, the same point made in the parable of the mustard seed, which preceded this one.</p></p>
<p id="n4201372"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201372">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201373"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201373">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201374"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201374">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a distributive use of <span class="greek">κατά</span> (<span class="translit">kata</span>); see L&amp;N 83:12.</p></p>
<p id="n4201375"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201375">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “cities.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201376"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201376">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “making his journey toward.” This is the first of several travel notes in Luke’s Jerusalem journey section of Luke 9-19; other notes appear at 17:11; 18:31; 19:28, 41.</p></p>
<p id="n4201378"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201378">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201379"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201379">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201380"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201380">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> The warnings earlier in Jesus’ teaching have led to the question whether <i>only a few</i> will be saved.</p></p>
<p id="n4201381"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201381">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that Jesus’ reply was triggered by the preceding question. </p></p>
<p id="n4201382"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201382">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Make every effort” (L&amp;N 68.74; cf. NIV); “Do your best” (TEV); “Work hard” (NLT); <i>Grk</i> “Struggle.” The idea is to exert one’s maximum effort (cf. BDAG 17 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀγωνίζομαι</span> 2.b, “strain every nerve to enter”) because of the supreme importance of attaining entry into the kingdom of God.</p></p>
<p id="n4201383"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201383">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> The syntactical relationship between vv. 24-25 is disputed. The question turns on whether v. 25 is connected to v. 24 or not. A lack of a clear connective makes an independent idea more likely. However, one must then determine what the beginning of the sentence connects to. Though it makes for slightly awkward English, the translation has opted to connect it to “he will answer” so that this functions, in effect, as an apodosis. One could end the sentence after “us” and begin a new sentence with “He will answer” to make simpler sentences, although the connection between the two sentences is thereby less clear. The point of the passage, however, is clear. Once the door is shut, because one failed to come in through the narrow way, it is closed permanently. The moral: Do not be too late in deciding to respond.</p></p>
<p id="n4201384"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201384">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the master of the household.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201385"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201385">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rises,” or “stands up.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201386"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201386">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Sir.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201387"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201387">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Open to us.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201388"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201388">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and answering, he will say to you.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified to “he will answer you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201389"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201389">89</a> <p><b>sn</b> For the imagery behind the statement “<i>I do not know where you come from</i>,” see Ps 138:6; Isa 63:16; Jer 1:5; Hos 5:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4201390"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201390">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> This term refers to wide <i>streets</i>, and thus suggests the major streets of a city.</p></p>
<p id="n4201391"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201391">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201392"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201392">92</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75*</sup> A D L W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 070 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have <span class="greek">ἐρεῖ λέγω ὑμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">erei legō humin</span>; “he will say, ‘I say to you’”) here, while some have only <span class="greek">ἐρεῖ ὑμῖν</span> (“he will say to you” in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> 579 lat sa) or simply <span class="greek">ἐρεῖ</span> (“he will say” in 1195). The variety of readings seems to have arisen from the somewhat unusual wording of the initial text, <span class="greek">ἐρεῖ λέγων ὑμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">erei legōn humin</span>; “he will say, saying to you” found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75c</sup> B 892). Given the indicative <span class="greek">λέγω</span>, it is difficult to explain how the other readings would have arisen. But if the participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> were original, the other readings can more easily be explained as arising from it. Although the external evidence is significantly stronger in support of the indicative reading, the internal evidence is on the side of the participle. </p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he will say, saying to you.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) and its indirect object <span class="greek">ὑμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">humin</span>) are redundant in contemporary English and have not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201393"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201393">93</a> <p><b>sn</b> The issue is not familiarity (with Jesus’ teaching) or even shared activity (eating and drinking with him), but knowing Jesus. Those who do not know him, he will not <i>know where</i> they <i>come from</i> (i.e., will not acknowledge) at the judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n4201394"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201394">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all you workers of iniquity.” The phrase resembles Ps 6:8.</p></p>
<p id="n4201395"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201395">95</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Weeping and gnashing of teeth</i> is a figure for remorse and trauma, which occurs here because of exclusion from God’s promise.</p></p>
<p id="n4201396"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201396">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and Isaac and Jacob,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4201397"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201397">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. See the note on this phrase in v. 18.</p></p>
<p id="n4201398"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201398">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “being thrown out.” The present accusative participle, <span class="greek">ἐκβαλλομένους</span> (<span class="translit">ekballomenous</span>), related to the object <span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">humas</span>), seems to suggest that these evildoers will witness their own expulsion from the kingdom.</p></p>
<p id="n4201399"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n4201399">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events in the discourse.</p></p>
<p id="n42013100"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (people who will come to participate in the kingdom) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42013101"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and recline at table,” as first century middle eastern meals were not eaten while sitting at a table, but while reclining on one’s side on the floor with the head closest to the low table and the feet farthest away. The phrase “take their places at the banquet table” has been used in the translation to clarify for the modern reader the festive nature of the imagery. The banquet imagery is a way of describing the fellowship and celebration of participation with the people of God at the end. Cf. BDAG 65 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνακλίνω</span> 2, “In transf. sense, of the Messianic banquet w. the idea <i>dine in style</i> (or some similar rendering, not simply ‘eat’ as NRSV) Mt 8:11; Lk 13:29.”</p></p>
<p id="n42013102"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013102">102</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. See the note on this phrase in v. 18.</p></p>
<p id="n42013103"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n42013104"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n42013105"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013105">105</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Some are last who will be first, and some are first who will be last</i>. Jesus’ answer is that some who are expected to be there (many from Israel) will not be there, while others not expected to be present (from other nations) will be present. The question is not, “Will the saved be few?” (see v. 23), but “Will it be you?”</p></p>
<p id="n42013106"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “At that very hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n42013107"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n42013108"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42013109"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Go away and leave from here,” which is redundant in English and has been shortened to “Get away from here.”</p></p>
<p id="n42013110"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013110">110</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Herod</i> refers here to Herod Antipas. See the note on <i>Herod</i> Antipas in 3:1.</p></p>
<p id="n42013111"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n42013112"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">πορευθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">poreuthentes</span>) has been taken as indicating attendant circumstance.</p></p>
<p id="n42013113"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013113">113</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>That fox</i>. This is not fundamentally a figure for cleverness as in modern western culture, but could indicate (1) an insignificant person (Neh 4:3; 2 Esd 13:35 LXX); (2) a deceiver (<i>Song Rabbah</i> 2.15.1 on 2:15); or someone destructive, a destroyer (Ezek 13:4; Lam 5:18; <i>1 En</i>. 89:10, 42-49, 55). Luke’s emphasis seems to be on destructiveness, since Herod killed John the Baptist, whom Luke calls “the greatest born of women” (Luke 7:28) and later stands opposed to Jesus (Acts 4:26-28). In addition, “a person who is designated a fox is an insignificant or base person. He lacks real power and dignity, using cunning deceit to achieve his aims” (H. W. Hoehner, <i>Herod Antipas</i> [SNTSMS], 347).</p></p>
<p id="n42013114"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013114">114</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>third day</i> is a figurative reference to being further on in time, not a reference to three days from now. Jesus is not even in Jerusalem yet, and the events of the last days in Jerusalem take a good week.</p></p>
<p id="n42013115"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I reach my goal.” The verb <span class="greek">τελειόω</span> (<span class="translit">teleioō</span>) is a key NT term for the completion of God’s plan: See Luke 12:50; 22:37; John 19:30; and (where it has the additional component of meaning “to perfect”) Heb 2:10; 5:8-9; 7:28.</p></p>
<p id="n42013116"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is the frequent expression <span class="greek">δεῖ</span> (<span class="translit">dei</span>, “it is necessary”) that notes something that is a part of God’s plan.</p></p>
<p id="n42013117"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “unthinkable.” See L&amp;N 71.4 for both possible meanings.</p></p>
<p id="n42013118"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “should perish away from.”</p></p>
<p id="n42013119"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013119">119</a> <p><b>sn</b> Death in <i>Jerusalem</i> is another key theme in Luke’s material: 7:16, 34; 24:19; Acts 3:22-23. Notice that Jesus sees himself in the role of a prophet here. Jesus’ statement, <i>it is impossible that a prophet should be killed outside Jerusalem</i>, is filled with irony; Jesus, traveling about in Galilee (most likely), has nothing to fear from Herod; it is his own people living in the very center of Jewish religion and worship who present the greatest danger to his life. The underlying idea is that Jerusalem, though she stands at the very heart of the worship of God, often kills the prophets God sends to her (v. 34). In the end, Herod will be much less a threat than Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n42013120"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013120">120</a> <p><b>sn</b> The double use of the city’s name betrays intense emotion.</p></p>
<p id="n42013121"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the opening address (“Jerusalem, Jerusalem”) is direct (second person), the remainder of this sentence in the Greek text is third person (“who kills the prophets and stones those sent to her”). The following sentences then revert to second person (“your…you”), so to keep all this consistent in English, the third person pronouns in the present verse were translated as second person (“you who kill…sent to you”).</p></p>
<p id="n42013122"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013122">122</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>How often I have longed to gather your children</i>. Jesus, like a lamenting prophet, speaks for God here, who longed to care tenderly for Israel and protect her.</p></p>
<p id="n42013123"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n42013124"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you were not willing.”</p></p>
<p id="n42013125"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013125">125</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Your house is forsaken</i>. The language here is from Jer 12:7 and 22:5. It recalls exilic judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n42013126"><a href="file1028.xhtml#n42013126">126</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 118:26. The judgment to come will not be lifted until the Lord returns. See Luke 19:41-44.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
