<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Mark 8</h2>
<p id="n410081"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n410081">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410082"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n410082">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n410083"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n410083">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410084"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n410084">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410085"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n410085">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They.”</p></p>
<p id="n410086"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n410086">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> The parallel in Matt 15:32-39 notes that the 4,000 were only men, a point not made explicit in Mark.</p></p>
<p id="n410087"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n410087">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “who ate” are not in the Greek text but have been supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n410088"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n410088">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Mark 8:1-10</i>. Many commentators, on the basis of similarities between this account of the feeding of the multitude (8:1-10) and that in 6:30-44, have argued that there is only one event referred to in both passages. While there are similarities in language and in the response of the disciples, there are also noticeable differences, including the different number present on each occasion (i.e., 5,000 in chap. 6 and 4,000 here). In the final analysis, the fact that Jesus refers to two distinct feedings in 8:18-20 settles the issue; this passage represents another very similar incident to that recorded in 6:30-44.</p></p>
<p id="n410089"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n410089">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note at Mark 1:19 for a description of the first-century fishing boat discovered in 1986 near Tiberias on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n4100810"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100810">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> The exact location of <i>Dalmanutha</i> is uncertain. It is mentioned nowhere else in the NT. The parallel passage in Matt 15:39 reads either “Magdala” (which is on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee) or “Magadan” (which is the better attested reading but is otherwise unknown). A small anchorage north of Magdala and west of Capernaum investigated in 1970 during a period of low lake levels in the Sea of Galilee has been suggested as the possible location of Dalmanutha (M. Nun, “Ancient Anchorages and Harbors in the Sea of Galilee,” <i>Nature and Land</i> 5 (1971): 212-19) but there is no scholarly consensus.</p></p>
<p id="n4100811"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100811">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 2:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4100812"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100812">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seeking from him.” The participle <span class="greek">ζητοῦντες</span> (<span class="translit">zētountes</span>) shows the means by which the Pharisees argued with Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4100813"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100813">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> What exactly this <i>sign</i> would have been, given what Jesus was already doing, is not clear. But here is where the fence-sitters reside, refusing to commit to him.</p></p>
<p id="n4100814"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100814">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100815"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100816"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100816">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4100817"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100817">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100818"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100818">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “was giving them orders, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4100819"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100819">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 2:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4100820"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100820">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they were discussing with one another that they had no bread.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100821"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100821">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “becoming aware of it.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100822"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100822">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “discussing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100823"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100823">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do you not hear?”</p></p>
<p id="n4100824"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100824">24</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ A difficult textual problem is found here, involving three different variants: <span class="greek">καὶ λέγουσιν</span> (<span class="translit">kai legousin</span>) is found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>; <span class="greek">οἱ δὲ εἶπον</span> (<span class="translit">hoi de eipon</span>) is the reading of <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45</sup> A D W <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it; and <span class="greek">καὶ λέγουσιν αὐτῷ</span> (<span class="translit">kai legousin autō</span>) is supported by B C L (<span class="greek">Δ</span> 579 892). The first two variants would not be translated differently; the third reading, however, would add “to him” after “they replied.” What complicates the issue is that the external evidence is fairly evenly split between the second and third readings, though the first reading is in agreement with the second reading in lacking the dative pronoun. Indeed, another layout of the problem here could treat this as two distinct problems: <span class="greek">καὶ λέγουσιν</span> vs. <span class="greek">οἱ δὲ εἶπον</span> and <span class="greek">αὐτῷ</span> vs. omission of the word. In this second arrangement of the problem, the reading without the pronoun has slightly stronger support (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D W <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it). Internally, Mark never elsewhere uses the form <span class="greek">εἶπον</span> for the third person plural indicative form of this verb (it is always <span class="greek">εἶπαν</span> [<span class="translit">eipan</span>]). And although only one other time in Mark is the object lacking after <span class="greek">λέγουσιν</span> (6:38), it is a similar context (viz., the disciples’ response before Jesus feeds the 5000). Very tentatively, the reading that is followed here is <span class="greek">καὶ λέγουσιν</span>. NA<sup>28</sup> puts <span class="greek">αὐτῷ</span> in brackets, indicating some doubt as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100825"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100825">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then” to indicate the implied sequence in the narrative. </p></p>
<p id="n4100826"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100826">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Do you still not understand?</i> The disciples in Mark’s Gospel often misunderstood the miracles of Jesus as well as his teaching. Between Matthew, Mark, and Luke, Mark paints the most revealing portrait of the shortcomings of the Twelve (cf. 6:51-52; 7:17-19; 8:1-10, 14-21, 27-30, 33; 9:5, 10, 33; 10:28, 35-45; 14:19, 29-31, 32-37, 50, 66-72).</p></p>
<p id="n4100827"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100827">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100828"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100828">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100829"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100829">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “village, and.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4100830"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100830">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on him,” but the word <span class="greek">πάλιν</span> in v. 25 implies that Jesus touched the man’s eyes at this point.</p></p>
<p id="n4100831"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100831">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἀναβλέπω</span>, though normally meaning “look up,” when used in conjunction with blindness means “regain sight.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100832"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100832">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100833"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100833">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (the blind man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100834"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100834">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “he looked intently”; or “he stared with eyes wide open” (BDAG 226 s.v. <span class="greek">διαβλέπω</span> 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4100835"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100835">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100836"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100836">36</a> <p><b>tc</b> Codex Bezae (D) replaces “Do not even go into the village” with “Go to your house, and do not tell anyone, not even in the village.” Other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> with some minor variations (<span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 28 565 2542) expand on this prohibition to read “Go to your house, and if you go into the village, do not tell anyone.” There are several other variants here as well. While these expansions are not part of Mark’s original text, they do accurately reflect the sense of Jesus’ prohibition.</p></p>
<p id="n4100838"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100838">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he asked his disciples, saying to them.” The phrase <span class="greek">λέγων αὐτοῖς</span> (<span class="translit">legōn autois</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4100839"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100839">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they said to him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4100840"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100840">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> The appearance of <i>Elijah</i> would mean that the end time had come. According to 2 Kgs 2:11, Elijah was still alive. In Mal 4:5 it is said that Elijah would be the precursor of Messiah.</p></p>
<p id="n4100841"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100841">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Answering, Peter said to him.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified to “Peter answered him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100842"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100842">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The term <span class="greek">χριστός</span> (<span class="translit">christos</span>) was originally an adjective (“anointed”), developing in LXX into a substantive (“an anointed one”), then developing still further into a technical generic term (“the anointed one”). In the intertestamental period it developed further into a technical term referring to the hoped-for anointed one, that is, a specific individual. In the NT the development starts there (technical-specific), is so used in the gospels, and then develops in Paul to mean virtually Jesus’ last name.</p></p>
<p id="n4100843"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100843">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then” to indicate the conclusion of the episode.</p></p>
<p id="n4100844"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100844">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Mark 8:27-10:52</i>. The entire section 8:27-10:52 is built around three passion predictions of Jesus (8:31; 9:31; 10:33). These predictions form the structure of the section, the content for the section (Jesus’ suffering, death, and the meaning of genuine discipleship) and the mood of the section (i.e., a somber mood). What is interesting is that after each passion prediction, Mark records both the misunderstanding of the disciples and then Jesus’ teaching on the nature of his death and what genuine discipleship is all about: (1) denying oneself (8:34-38); (2) humility and serving (9:33-37); (3) suffering, humble service, and not lording it over people (10:35-45). For further discussion of the structure of the passage, see W. L. Lane, <i>Mark</i> (NICNT)<i>,</i> 292-94.</p></p>
<p id="n4100845"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100845">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100846"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100846">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100847"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100847">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> The necessity that the Son of Man <i>suffer</i> is the particular point that needed emphasis, since for many 1st century Jews the Messiah was a glorious and powerful figure, not a suffering one.</p></p>
<p id="n4100848"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100848">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4100849"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100849">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “So” to indicate Peter’s rebuke is in response to Jesus’ teaching about the suffering of the Son of Man.</p></p>
<p id="n4100850"><a href="file1006.xhtml#n4100850">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “people’s.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
