<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Hebrews 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Lord’s Discipline</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> Therefore, since we are surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses,<sup><a id="n580121" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n580121">1</a></sup> we must get rid of every weight and the sin that clings so closely, and run with endurance the race set out for us, <span class="verse">12:2</span> keeping our eyes fixed on Jesus, the pioneer and perfecter of our faith. For<sup><a id="n580122" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n580122">2</a></sup> the joy set out for him he endured the cross, disregarding its shame, and <i>has taken his seat at the right hand of the throne</i> of God.<sup><a id="n580123" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n580123">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:3</span> Think of him who endured such opposition against himself by sinners, so that you may not grow weary in your souls and give up. <span class="verse">12:4</span> You have not yet resisted to the point of bloodshed<sup><a id="n580124" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n580124">4</a></sup> in your struggle against sin. <span class="verse">12:5</span> And have you forgotten the exhortation addressed to you as sons?</p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<i><b>My son, do not scorn</b></i><sup><a id="n580125" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n580125">5</a></sup> <b><i>the Lord’s discipline</i></b> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>or give up when he corrects</i></b><sup><a id="n580126" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n580126">6</a></sup> <i><b>you</b></i>.</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">12:6</span> “<i><b>For the Lord disciplines the one he loves and chastises every son he accepts</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n580127" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n580127">7</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:7</span> Endure your suffering<sup><a id="n580128" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n580128">8</a></sup> as discipline;<sup><a id="n580129" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n580129">9</a></sup> God is treating you as sons. For what son is there that a father does not discipline? <span class="verse">12:8</span> But if you do not experience discipline,<sup><a id="n5801210" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801210">10</a></sup> something all sons<sup><a id="n5801211" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801211">11</a></sup> have shared in, then you are illegitimate and are not sons. <span class="verse">12:9</span> Besides, we have experienced discipline from<sup><a id="n5801212" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801212">12</a></sup> our earthly fathers<sup><a id="n5801213" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801213">13</a></sup> and we respected them; shall we not submit ourselves all the more to the Father of spirits and receive life?<sup><a id="n5801214" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801214">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:10</span> For they disciplined us for a little while as seemed good to them, but he does so for our benefit, that we may share his holiness. <span class="verse">12:11</span> Now all discipline seems painful at the time, not joyful.<sup><a id="n5801215" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801215">15</a></sup> But later it produces the fruit of peace and righteousness<sup><a id="n5801216" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801216">16</a></sup> for those trained by it. <span class="verse">12:12</span> Therefore, <b><i>strengthen</i></b><sup><a id="n5801217" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801217">17</a></sup> <b><i>your listless hands and your weak knees</i></b>,<sup><a id="n5801218" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801218">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:13</span> and <b><i>make</i></b> <b><i>straight paths for your feet</i></b>,<sup><a id="n5801219" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801219">19</a></sup> so that what is lame may not be put out of joint but be healed. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Do Not Reject God’s Warning </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:14</span> Pursue peace with everyone, and holiness,<sup><a id="n5801220" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801220">20</a></sup> for without it no one will see the Lord. <span class="verse">12:15</span> See to it that no one comes short of the grace of God, that no one be like <i>a bitter root springing up</i><sup><a id="n5801221" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801221">21</a></sup> and causing trouble, and through it many become defiled. <span class="verse">12:16</span> And see to it that no one becomes<sup><a id="n5801222" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801222">22</a></sup> an immoral or godless person like Esau, who <i>sold</i> <i>his own birthright for a single meal</i>.<sup><a id="n5801223" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801223">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:17</span> For you know that<sup><a id="n5801224" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801224">24</a></sup> later when he wanted to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no opportunity for repentance, although he sought the blessing<sup><a id="n5801225" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801225">25</a></sup> with tears. <span class="verse">12:18</span> For you have not come to something that can be touched,<sup><a id="n5801226" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801226">26</a></sup> to a burning fire and darkness and gloom and a whirlwind <span class="verse">12:19</span> and the blast of a trumpet and a voice uttering words<sup><a id="n5801227" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801227">27</a></sup> such that those who heard begged to hear no more.<sup><a id="n5801228" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801228">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:20</span> For they could not bear what was commanded: “<i><b>If even an animal touches the mountain, it must be stoned</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n5801229" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801229">29</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:21</span> In fact, the scene<sup><a id="n5801230" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801230">30</a></sup> was so terrifying that Moses said, “<b><i>I shudder with fear</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n5801231" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801231">31</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:22</span> But you have come to Mount Zion, the city<sup><a id="n5801232" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801232">32</a></sup> of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of angels, to the assembly<span class="verse">12:23</span> and congregation of the firstborn, who are enrolled in heaven, and to God, the judge of all, and to the spirits of the righteous, who have been made perfect, <span class="verse">12:24</span> and to Jesus, the mediator<sup><a id="n5801233" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801233">33</a></sup> of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that speaks of something better than Abel’s does.<sup><a id="n5801234" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801234">34</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:25</span> Take care not to refuse the one who is speaking! For if they did not escape when they refused the one who warned them on earth, how much less shall we, if we reject the one who warns from heaven? <span class="verse">12:26</span> Then his voice shook the earth, but now he has promised, “<b><i>I will once more shake not only the earth but heaven too</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n5801235" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801235">35</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:27</span> Now this phrase “<b><i>once more</i></b>” indicates the removal of what is shaken, that is, of created things, so that what is unshaken may remain. <span class="verse">12:28</span> So since we are receiving an unshakable kingdom, let us give thanks, and through this let us offer worship pleasing to God in devotion and awe. <span class="verse">12:29</span> For our <b><i>God</i></b> <b><i>is indeed a devouring fire</i></b>.<sup><a id="n5801236" href="file1203_notes.xhtml#n5801236">36</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>