<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 9</h2>
<p id="n420091"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n420091">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n420092"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n420092">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n420093"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n420093">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> An aorist participle preceding an aorist main verb may indicate either contemporaneous (simultaneous) action (“When he called…he gave”) or antecedent (prior) action (“After he called…he gave”). The participle <span class="greek">συγκαλεσάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">sunkalesamenos</span>) has been translated here as indicating antecedent action.</p></p>
<p id="n420094"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n420094">4</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> add <span class="greek">ἀποστόλους</span> (<span class="translit">apostolous</span>, “apostles”; <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C* L <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 070 0291 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 579 892 1241 1424 2542 lat) or <span class="greek">μαθητὰς αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">mathētas autou</span>, “his disciples”; C<sup>3</sup> <i>al</i> it) here, but such clarifying notes are clearly secondary.</p></p>
<p id="n420095"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n420095">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note how Luke distinguishes between exorcisms (<i>authority over all demons</i>) and <i>diseases</i> here.</p></p>
<p id="n420096"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n420096">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> “To send out” is often a term of divine commission in Luke: 1:19; 4:18, 43; 7:27; 9:48; 10:1, 16; 11:49; 13:34; 24:49.</p></p>
<p id="n420097"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n420097">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to preach.”</p></p>
<p id="n420098"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n420098">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n420099"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n420099">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> As Jesus’ own ministry (Luke 4:16-44) involved both word (<i>to proclaim</i>) and deed (<i>to heal</i>) so also would that of the disciples.</p></p>
<p id="n4200910"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200911"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200911">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the”; in context the article is used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n4200912"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200912">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> Mark 6:8 allows one staff. It might be that Luke’s summary (cf. Matt 10:9-10) means not taking an extra staff or that the expression is merely rhetorical for “traveling light” which has been rendered in two slightly different ways.</p></p>
<p id="n4200913"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200913">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “no traveler’s bag”; or possibly “no beggar’s bag” (L&amp;N 6.145; BDAG 811 s.v. <span class="greek">πήρα</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4200914"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200914">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have two tunics.” See the note on the word “tunics” in 3:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4200915"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200915">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And whatever.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200916"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200916">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus telling his disciples to <i>stay there</i> in one house contrasts with the practice of religious philosophers in the ancient world who went from house to house begging.</p></p>
<p id="n4200917"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and depart from there.” The literal wording could be easily misunderstood; the meaning is that the disciples were not to move from house to house in the same town or locality, but remain at the same house as long as they were in that place.</p></p>
<p id="n4200918"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200918">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And wherever.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200919"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all those who do not receive you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200920"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200920">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “city.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200921"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200921">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> To <i>shake the dust off</i> represented shaking off the uncleanness from one’s feet; see Luke 10:11; Acts 13:51; 18:6. It was a sign of rejection.</p></p>
<p id="n4200922"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200922">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200923"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200923">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a distributive use of <span class="greek">κατά</span> (<span class="translit">kata</span>); see L&amp;N 83:12 where this verse is cited as an example of the usage.</p></p>
<p id="n4200924"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200924">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “preaching the gospel.” </p><p><b>sn</b> This verse is similar to Luke 9:2, except for <i>good news</i> at this point. The change means that to “preach the kingdom” is to “preach the good news.” The ideas are interchangeable as summaries for the disciples’ message. They are combined in Luke 8:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4200925"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200925">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Herod</i> refers here to Herod Antipas. See the note on <i>Herod</i> Antipas in 3:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4200926"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200926">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>tetrarch</i> in 3:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4200927"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200927">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was very confused.” See L&amp;N 32.10 where this verse is given as an example of the usage.</p></p>
<p id="n4200928"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200928">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John</i> refers to John the Baptist, whom Herod had beheaded (v. 9).</p></p>
<p id="n4200929"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200929">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> The appearance of <i>Elijah</i> would mean that the end time had come. According to 2 Kgs 2:11, Elijah was still alive. In Mal 4:5 it is said that Elijah would be the precursor of Messiah.</p></p>
<p id="n4200930"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200930">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>had risen</i> could be understood to mean “had been resurrected,” but this is only a possible option, not a necessary one, since the phrase could merely mean that a figure had appeared on the scene who mirrored an earlier historical figure. The three options of vv. 7-8 will be repeated in v. 19.</p></p>
<p id="n4200931"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200931">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “John I beheaded”; John’s name is in emphatic position in the Greek text. The verb is causative, since Herod would not have personally carried out the execution.</p></p>
<p id="n4200932"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200932">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression <span class="greek">ἐζήτει ἰδεῖν αὐτόν</span> (<span class="translit">ezētei idein auton</span>, “was seeking to see him”) probably indicates that Herod, for curiosity’s sake or more likely for evil purposes, wanted to get to know Jesus, i.e., who he was and what he was doing. See I. H. Marshall, <i>Luke</i> (NIGTC), 357. Herod finally got his wish in Luke 23:6-12, with inconclusive results from his point of view.</p></p>
<p id="n4200933"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200933">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200934"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200934">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ὑποστρέψαντες</span> (<span class="translit">hupostrepsantes</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4200935"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200935">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200936"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200936">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200937"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200937">37</a> <p><b>tc</b> There is a seeming myriad of variants for this text. Many <span class="smcaps">mss</span> read <span class="greek">εἰς τόπον ἔρημον</span> (<span class="translit">eis topon erēmon</span>, “to a deserted place”; <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*<sup>,2</sup> [1241]) or <span class="greek">εἰς τόπον ἔρημον πόλεως καλουμένης Βηθσαϊδά</span> (<span class="translit">eis topon erēmon poleōs kaloumenēs Bēthsaida</span>, “to a deserted place of a town called Bethsaida”; [A] C W <span class="greek">Ξ</span><sup>mg</sup> [ƒ<sup>1,13</sup>] [565] <span class="apparatus">M</span>) here, while others have <span class="greek">εἰς κώμην λεγομένην Βηδσαϊδά</span> (<span class="translit">eis kōmēn legomenēn Bēdsaida</span>, “to a village called Bedsaida”; D), <span class="greek">εἰς κώμην καλουμένην Βηθσαϊδά εἰς τόπον ἔρημον</span> (<span class="translit">eis kōmēn kaloumenēn Bēthsaida eis topon erēmon</span>, “to a village called Bethsaida to a deserted place”; <span class="greek">Θ</span>), or <span class="greek">εἰς τόπον καλουμένον Βηθσαϊδά</span> (<span class="translit">eis topon kaloumenon Bēthsaida</span>, “to a place called Bethsaida”; <span class="greek">Ψ</span>). The Greek behind the translation (<span class="greek">εἰς πόλιν καλουμένην Βηθσαϊδά</span>, <span class="translit">eis polin kaloumenēn Bēthsaida</span>) is supported by (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup>) <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> B L <span class="greek">Ξ</span>* 33 2542 co. The variants can be grouped generally into those that speak of a “deserted place” and those that speak of a place/city/town called Bethsaida. The Byzantine reading is evidently a conflation of the earlier texts, and should be dismissed as secondary. The variants that speak of a deserted place are an assimilation to Mark 6:32, as well a harmonization with v. 12, and should also be regarded as secondary. The reading that best explains the rise of the others—both internally and externally—is the one that stands behind the translation and is found in the text of NA<sup>28</sup>.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “city.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200938"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200938">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Bethsaida</i> was a town on the northeast side of the Sea of Galilee. Probably this should be understood to mean a place in the vicinity of the town. It represents an attempt to reconcile the location with the place of the miraculous feeding that follows.</p></p>
<p id="n4200939"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200939">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200940"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200940">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n4200941"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200941">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> Again the combination of word (<i>spoke to them</i>) and healing (<i>cured</i>, compassionate deed) is what summarizes Jesus’ ministry: See Luke 4:38-44; 6:17-19; 7:22 (as also the disciples, 9:6).</p></p>
<p id="n4200942"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200942">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the day began to decline,” looking to the approach of sunset.</p></p>
<p id="n4200943"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200943">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that the disciples’ request was related to the approach of sunset. </p></p>
<p id="n4200944"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200944">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200945"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200945">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, find someone to show them hospitality. L&amp;N 34.61 has “find lodging,” using this verse as an example.</p></p>
<p id="n4200946"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200946">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in a desert” (meaning a deserted or desolate area with sparse vegetation). Here <span class="greek">ὧδε</span> (<span class="translit">hōde</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4200947"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200947">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the pronoun <span class="greek">ὑμεῖς</span> (<span class="translit">humeis</span>) is used, making “you” in the translation emphatic.</p></p>
<p id="n4200948"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200948">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4200949"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200949">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200950"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200950">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> This possibility is introduced through a conditional clause, but it is expressed with some skepticism (BDF §376).</p></p>
<p id="n4200951"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200951">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">πορευθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">poreuthentes</span>) has been taken as indicating attendant circumstance.</p></p>
<p id="n4200952"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200952">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> Not only would going and buying food have been expensive and awkward at this late time of day, it would have taken quite a logistical effort to get the food back out to this isolated location. </p></p>
<p id="n4200953"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200953">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek text reads here <span class="greek">ἄνδρες</span> (<span class="translit">andres</span>)—that is, adult males. The actual count would be larger, since the use of this Greek term suggests that women and children were not included in this number (see the parallel in Matt 14:21).</p></p>
<p id="n4200954"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200954">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4200955"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200955">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200956"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200956">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Make” (depending on how the force of the imperative verb is understood). <i>Grk</i> “cause them to recline” (the verb has causative force here).</p></p>
<p id="n4200957"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200957">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they did thus.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that the disciples’ action was a result of Jesus’ instructions. The adverb <span class="greek">οὕτως</span> (<span class="translit">houtōs</span>, “thus”) has been expanded in the translation to “as Jesus directed” to clarify what was done.</p></p>
<p id="n4200958"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200958">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and they”; the referent (the people) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200959"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200959">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200960"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200960">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Gave thanks</i> adds a note of gratitude to the setting. The scene is like two other later meals: Luke 22:19 and 24:30. Jesus gives thanks to God “with respect to” the provision of food. The disciples learn how Jesus is the mediator of blessing. John 6 speaks of him in this scene as picturing the “Bread of Life.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200961"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200961">61</a> <p><b>sn</b> There was more than enough for everybody, as indicated by the gathering of <i>what was left over</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4200962"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200962">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200963"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200963">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200964"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200964">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> Prayer is a favorite theme of Luke and he is the only one of the gospel authors to mention it in the following texts (with the exception of 22:41): Luke 3:21; 5:16; 6:12; 9:28-29; 11:1; 22:41; 23:34, 46.</p></p>
<p id="n4200965"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200965">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the disciples were with him, and he asked them, saying.” </p></p>
<p id="n4200966"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200966">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>Who do the crowds say that I am?</i>” The question of who Jesus is occurs frequently in this section of Luke: 7:49; 8:25; 9:9. The answer resolves a major theme of Luke’s Gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n4200967"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200967">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200968"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200968">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, they said.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified to “They answered.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200969"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200969">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> The appearance of <i>Elijah</i> would mean that the end time had come. According to 2 Kgs 2:11, Elijah was still alive. In Mal 4:5 it is said that Elijah would be the precursor of Messiah.</p></p>
<p id="n4200970"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200970">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>has risen</i> could be understood to mean “has been resurrected,” but this is only a possible option, not a necessary one, since the phrase could merely mean that a figure had appeared on the scene who mirrored an earlier historical figure. Note that the three categories in the reply match the ones in Luke 9:7-8.</p></p>
<p id="n4200971"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200971">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200972"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200972">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4200973"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200973">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Peter answering, said.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified to “Peter answered.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200974"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200974">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.” </p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4200975"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200975">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> The combination of the participle and verb <span class="greek">ἐπιτιμήσας</span> and <span class="greek">παρήγγειλεν</span> (<span class="translit">epitimēsas</span> and <span class="translit">parēngeilen</span>, “commanding, he ordered”) is a hendiadys that makes the instruction emphatic.</p></p>
<p id="n4200976"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200976">76</a> <p><b>sn</b> No explanation for the command <i>not to tell this to anyone</i> is given, but the central section of Luke, chapters 9-19, appears to reveal a reason. The disciples needed to understand who the Messiah really was and exactly what he would do before they were ready to proclaim Jesus as such. But they and the people had an expectation that needed some instruction to be correct. </p></p>
<p id="n4200977"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200977">77</a> <p><b>sn</b> The necessity that the Son of Man <i>suffer</i> is the particular point that needed emphasis, since for many 1st century Jews the Messiah was a glorious and powerful figure, not a suffering one.</p></p>
<p id="n4200978"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200978">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> Rejection in Luke is especially by the Jewish leadership (here <i>elders, chief priests, and experts in the law</i>), though in Luke 23 almost all will join in.</p></p>
<p id="n4200979"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200979">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4200980"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200980">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> The description of the <i>Son of Man</i> being <i>rejected…killed, and…raised</i> is the first of six passion summaries in Luke: 9:44; 17:25; 18:31-33; 24:7; 24:46-47.</p></p>
<p id="n4200981"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200981">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200982"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200982">82</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here <i>them all</i> could be limited to the disciples, since Jesus was alone with them in v. 18. It could also be that by this time the crowd had followed and found him, and he addressed them, or this could be construed as a separate occasion from the discussion with the disciples in 9:18-22. The cost of discipleship is something Jesus was willing to tell both insiders and outsiders about. The rejection he felt would also fall on his followers.</p></p>
<p id="n4200983"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200983">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to come after me.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200984"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200984">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> This translation better expresses the force of the Greek third person imperative than the traditional “let him deny,” which could be understood as merely permissive.</p></p>
<p id="n4200985"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200985">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> Only Luke mentions taking up one’s cross <i>daily</i>. To bear the cross means to accept the rejection of the world for turning to Jesus and following him. Discipleship involves a death that is like a crucifixion; see Gal 6:14.</p></p>
<p id="n4200986"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200986">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his soul.” The Greek <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) has many different meanings depending on the context. The two primary meanings here are the earthly life (animate life, sometimes called “physical life”) and the inner life (the life that transcends the earthly life, sometimes called “the soul”). The fact that the Greek term can have both meanings creates in this verse both a paradox and a wordplay. The desire to preserve both aspects of <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) for oneself creates the tension here (cf. BDAG 1099 s.v. 1.a; 2.d,e). Translation of the Greek term <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) presents a particularly difficult problem in this verse. Most English versions since the KJV have translated the term “life.” This preserves the paradox of finding one’s “life” (in the sense of earthly life) while at the same time really losing it (in the sense of “soul” or transcendent inner life) and vice versa, but at the same time it obscures the wordplay that results from the same Greek word having multiple meanings. To translate as “soul,” however, gives the modern English reader the impression of the immortal soul at the expense of the earthly life. On the whole it is probably best to use the translation “life” and retain the paradox at the expense of the wordplay.</p></p>
<p id="n4200987"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200987">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of the saying <i>whoever wants to save his life will lose it</i> is that if one comes to Jesus then rejection by many will certainly follow. If self-protection is a key motivation, then one will not respond to Jesus and will not be saved. One who is willing to risk rejection will respond and find true life.</p></p>
<p id="n4200988"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200988">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for my sake.” The traditional rendering “for my sake” can be understood in the sense of “for my benefit,” but the Greek term <span class="greek">ἕνεκα</span> (<i>heneka</i>) indicates the cause or reason for something (BDAG 334 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4200989"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200989">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a man,” but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used in a generic sense here to refer to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n4200990"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200990">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> How one responds now to Jesus and his teaching is a reflection of how Jesus, as the Son of Man who judges, will respond then in the final judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n4200991"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200991">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> This pronoun (<span class="greek">τοῦτον</span>, <span class="translit">touton</span>) is in emphatic position in its own clause in the Greek text: “of that person the Son of Man will be ashamed…”</p></p>
<p id="n4200992"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200992">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the glory of him and of the Father and of the holy angels.” “Glory” is repeated here in the translation for clarity and smoothness because the literal phrase is unacceptably awkward in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n4200993"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200993">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I tell you truly” (<span class="greek">λέγω δὲ ὑμῖν</span> <span class="greek">ἀληθῶς</span>, <span class="translit">legō de humin alēthōs</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4200994"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200994">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek negative here (<span class="greek">οὐ μή</span>, <span class="translit">ou mē</span>) is the strongest possible.</p></p>
<p id="n4200995"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200995">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will not taste.” Here the Greek verb does not mean “sample a small amount” (as a typical English reader might infer from the word “taste”), but “experience something cognitively or emotionally; come to know something” (cf. BDAG 195 s.v. <span class="greek">γεύομαι</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4200996"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200996">96</a> <p><b>sn</b> The meaning of the statement that some <i>will not taste death before they see the kingdom of God</i> is clear at one level, harder at another. Jesus predicts some will experience the kingdom before they die. When does this happen? (1) An initial fulfillment is the next event, the transfiguration. (2) It is also possible in Luke’s understanding that all but Judas experience the initial fulfillment of the coming of God’s presence and rule in the work of Acts 2. In either case, the “kingdom of God” referred to here would be the initial rather than the final phase.</p></p>
<p id="n4200997"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200997">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that about.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4200998"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200998">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> Matt 17:1 and Mark 9:2 specify the interval more exactly, saying it was the sixth day. Luke uses <span class="greek">ὡσεί</span> (<span class="translit">hōsei</span>, “about”) to give an approximate reference.</p></p>
<p id="n4200999"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n4200999">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42009100"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And as.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42009101"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the preposition <span class="greek">ἐν</span> (<span class="translit">en</span>) plus the dative articular aorist infinitive has been translated as a temporal clause (<i>ExSyn</i> 595).</p></p>
<p id="n42009102"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the appearance of his face became different.”</p><p><b>sn</b> In 1st century Judaism and in the NT, there was the belief that the righteous get new, glorified bodies in order to enter heaven (1 Cor 15:42-49; 2 Cor 5:1-10). This transformation means the righteous will share the glory of God. One recalls the way Moses shared the Lord’s glory after his visit to the mountain in Exod 34. So the disciples saw <i>the appearance of his face transformed</i>, and they were getting a sneak preview of the great glory that Jesus would have (only his glory is more inherent to him as one who shares in the rule of the kingdom). </p></p>
<p id="n42009103"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “became bright as a flash of lightning” (cf. BDAG 346 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐξαστράπτω</span>); or “became brilliant as light” (cf. BDAG 593 s.v. <span class="greek">λευκός</span> 1).</p></p>
<p id="n42009104"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n42009105"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009105">105</a> <p><b>sn</b> Commentators and scholars discuss why <i>Moses and Elijah</i> are present. The most likely explanation is that Moses represents the prophetic office (Acts 3:18-22) and Elijah pictures the presence of the last days (Mal 4:5-6), the prophet of the eschaton (the end times).</p></p>
<p id="n42009106"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “two men were talking with him, who were Moses and Elijah.” The relative clause has been simplified to an appositive and transposed in keeping with contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42009107"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his exodus,” which refers to Jesus’ death in Jerusalem and journey back to glory. Here is the first lesson that the disciples must learn. The wondrous rule comes only after suffering.</p></p>
<p id="n42009108"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “accomplish,” “bring to completion.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009110"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “weighed down with sleep” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n42009111"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “after they became fully awake,” “but they became fully awake and saw.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009112"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that as.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42009113"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as they”; the referent (“the men,” referring to Moses and Elijah) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42009114"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to leave from him.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009115"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “booths,” “dwellings” (referring to the temporary booths constructed in the celebration of the feast of Tabernacles).</p><p><b>sn</b> By making <i>three shelters</i> Peter apparently wanted to celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles or Booths that looked forward to the end and to treat Moses, Elijah, and Jesus as equals. It was actually a way of expressing honor to Jesus, but the remark at the end of the verse makes it clear that it was not enough honor.</p></p>
<p id="n42009116"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42009117"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009117">117</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>cloud</i> is the cloud of God’s presence and the voice is his as well.</p></p>
<p id="n42009118"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “appeared.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009119"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “surrounded.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009120"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42009121"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009121">121</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially the later ones, have <span class="greek">ἀγαπητός</span> (<span class="translit">agapētos</span>, “the one I love”; A C* W ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it), or <span class="greek">ἀγαπητὸς ἐν ᾧ</span> (<span class="greek">ἠ</span>)<span class="greek">υδόκησα</span> (<span class="translit">agapētos en hō</span> (<span class="translit">ē</span>)<span class="translit">udokēsa</span>, “the one I love, in whom I am well pleased”; C<sup>3</sup> D <span class="greek">Ψ</span>) here, instead of <span class="greek">ἐκλελεγμένος</span> (<span class="translit">eklelegmenos</span>, “the Chosen One”), but these variants are probably assimilations to Matt 17:5 and Mark 9:7. The text behind the translation also enjoys excellent support from <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45,75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L <span class="greek">Ξ</span> (579) 892 1241 co.</p><p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ὁ ἐκλελεγμένος</span> (<span class="translit">ho eklelegmenos</span>), which could be translated “the One who has been chosen,” is best understood as a title rather than a descriptive phrase, probably deriving from Isa 42:1 (LXX) which uses the similar <span class="greek">ὁ ἐκλεκτός</span> (<span class="translit">ho eklektos</span>) which also appears in Luke 23:35.</p><p><b>sn</b> This divine endorsement is like Luke 3:22 at Jesus’ baptism. One difference here is the mention of the <i>Chosen One</i>, a reference to the unique and beloved role of the regal, messianic Son.</p></p>
<p id="n42009122"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009122">122</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>listen to him</i> comes from Deut 18:15 and makes two points: 1) Jesus is a prophet like Moses, a leader-prophet, and 2) they have much yet to learn from him. </p></p>
<p id="n42009123"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42009124"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the concluding summary of the account. </p></p>
<p id="n42009125"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009125">125</a> <p><b>sn</b> Although the disciples <i>told no one</i> at the time, later they did recount this. The commentary on this scene is 2 Pet 1:17-18.</p></p>
<p id="n42009126"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in those days.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009127"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that on.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42009128"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the somewhat unexpected appearance of the man. The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n42009129"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “cried out, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42009130"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb means “to have regard for”; see Luke 1:48.</p></p>
<p id="n42009131"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and behold, a.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here; instead a new sentence was started in the translation. The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n42009132"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek here is slightly ambiguous; the subject of the verb “screams” could be either the son or the spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n42009133"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009133">133</a> <p><b>sn</b> The reaction is like an epileptic fit (see L&amp;N 14.27). See the parallel in Matt 17:14-20.</p></p>
<p id="n42009134"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bruising,” or “crushing.” This verb appears to allude to the damage caused when it throws him to the ground. According to L&amp;N 19.46 it is difficult to know from this verb precisely what the symptoms caused by the demon were, but it is clear they must have involved severe pain. The multiple details given in the account show how gruesome the condition of the boy was.</p></p>
<p id="n42009135"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And I.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here; instead a new sentence was started in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n42009136"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009136">136</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note the repetition of the verb from v. 38, an indication of the father’s desperation.</p></p>
<p id="n42009137"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n42009138"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “do so” are not in the Greek text, but have been supplied for clarity and stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n42009139"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009139">139</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, Jesus said.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified to “Jesus answered.” Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42009140"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O.” The marker of direct address, <span class="greek">ὦ</span> (<span class="translit">ō</span>), is functionally equivalent to a vocative and is represented in the translation by “you.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009141"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009141">141</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faithless.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The rebuke for lack of faith has OT roots: Num 14:27; Deut 32:5, 20; Isa 59:8.</p></p>
<p id="n42009142"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009142">142</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “how long.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009143"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009143">143</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and put up with.” See Num 11:12; Isa 46:4.</p></p>
<p id="n42009144"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009144">144</a> <p><b>sn</b> The pronouns <i>you…you</i> are plural, indicating that Jesus is speaking to a group rather than an individual.</p></p>
<p id="n42009145"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009145">145</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42009146"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009146">146</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the boy) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42009147"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009147">147</a> <p><b>sn</b> At this point the boy was thrown down in another convulsion by the demon. See L&amp;N 23.168.</p></p>
<p id="n42009148"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009148">148</a> <p><b>tn</b> See L&amp;N 23.167-68, where the second verb <span class="greek">συσπαράσσω</span> (<span class="translit">susparassō</span>) is taken to mean the violent shaking associated with the convulsions, thus the translation here “and shook him with convulsions.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009149"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009149">149</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “commanded” (often with the implication of a threat, L&amp;N 33.331).</p></p>
<p id="n42009150"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009150">150</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a reference to an evil spirit. See Luke 4:33.</p></p>
<p id="n42009151"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009151">151</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the response at the conclusion of the account.</p></p>
<p id="n42009152"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009152">152</a> <p><b>sn</b> The revelation of the <i>mighty power of God</i> was the manifestation of God’s power shown through Jesus. See Acts 10:38.</p></p>
<p id="n42009153"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009153">153</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all”; the referent (the crowd) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42009154"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009154">154</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially the later ones (A C W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0115 ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 892 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i>), actually supply <span class="greek">ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (<span class="translit">ho Iēsous</span>, “Jesus”) here. Since the earliest and best witnesses, along with many others (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D L <span class="greek">Ξ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 579 700 1241 2542 lat), lack the name, and since scribes were unlikely to intentionally omit it, the shorter reading is preferred as the reading of the initial text.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have done the same.</p></p>
<p id="n42009155"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009155">155</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Place these words into your ears,” an idiom. The meaning is either “do not forget these words” (L&amp;N 29.5) or “Listen carefully to these words” (L&amp;N 24.64). See also Exod 17:14. For a variation of this expression, see Luke 8:8.</p></p>
<p id="n42009156"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009156">156</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>) is considered by some to be used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women (cf. NRSV, “into human hands”; TEV, “to the power of human beings”). However, because this can be taken as a specific reference to the group responsible for Jesus’ arrest, where it is unlikely women were present (cf. Matt 26:47-56; Mark 14:43-52; Luke 22:47-53; John 18:2-12), the word “men” has been retained in the translation. There may also be a slight wordplay with “the Son of Man” earlier in the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n42009157"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009157">157</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it”; the referent (the meaning of the statement) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42009158"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009158">158</a> <p><b>sn</b> The passive verb <i>had been concealed</i> probably indicates that some force was preventing them from responding. It is debated whether God or Satan is meant here. By 24:25 it is clear that their lack of response is their own responsibility. The only way to reverse this is to pay careful attention as v. 44a urges.</p></p>
<p id="n42009159"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009159">159</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “yet” to indicate that in spite of their lack of understanding, the disciples were afraid to ask about it. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n42009160"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009160">160</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “among them”; the referent (the disciples) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42009161"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009161">161</a> <p><b>tn</b> The use of the optative mood means the answer is not clear (BDF §§267.2.2; 385.2.2).</p></p>
<p id="n42009162"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009162">162</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing the thoughts of their hearts” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n42009163"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009163">163</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this use of <span class="greek">παρά</span> (<span class="translit">para</span>), see BDF §238.</p></p>
<p id="n42009164"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009164">164</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb, <span class="greek">δέχομαι</span> (<span class="translit">dechomai</span>), is a term of hospitality (L&amp;N 34.53).</p></p>
<p id="n42009165"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009165">165</a> <p><b>sn</b> Children were very insignificant in ancient culture, so <i>this child</i> would be the perfect object lesson to counter the disciples’ selfish ambitions.</p></p>
<p id="n42009166"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009166">166</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “among you all, this one is great.” The absence of a comparative term here makes the point that comparison should not be done.</p></p>
<p id="n42009167"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009167">167</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, John said.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified to “John answered.” Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42009168"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009168">168</a> <p><b>tc</b> The translation follows the reading that has Luke’s normal imperfect here (<span class="greek">ἐκωλύομεν</span>, <span class="translit">ekōluomen</span>; found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L <span class="greek">Ξ</span> 579 892 1241). Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, however, have an aorist (<span class="greek">ἐκωλύσαμεν</span>, <span class="translit">ekōlusamen</span>; found in A C D W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> co), which would be translated “we forbade him.” The imperfect enjoys the best external and internal support.</p></p>
<p id="n42009169"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009169">169</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “does not follow with us.” BDAG 36 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀκολουθέω</span> 2 indicates that the pronoun <span class="greek">σοι</span> (<span class="translit">soi</span>, “you”) is to be supplied after the verb in this particular instance; the translation in the text best represents this nuance.</p></p>
<p id="n42009170"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009170">170</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that when.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42009171"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009171">171</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the days were being fulfilled.” There is literary design here. This starts what has been called in the Gospel of Luke the “Jerusalem Journey.” It is not a straight-line trip, but a journey to meet his fate (Luke 13:31-35).</p></p>
<p id="n42009172"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009172">172</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Taken up</i> is a reference to Jesus’ upcoming return to heaven by crucifixion and resurrection (compare Luke 9:31). This term was used in the LXX of Elijah’s departure in 2 Kgs 2:9.</p></p>
<p id="n42009173"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009173">173</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42009174"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009174">174</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he set his face,” a Semitic idiom that speaks of a firm, unshakable resolve to do something (Gen 31:21; Isa 50:7).</p></p>
<p id="n42009176"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009176">176</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42009177"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009177">177</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sent messengers before his face,” an idiom.</p></p>
<p id="n42009178"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009178">178</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And going along, they entered.” The aorist passive participle <span class="greek">πορευθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">poreuthentes</span>) has been taken temporally. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42009179"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009179">179</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to prepare (things) for him.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009180"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009180">180</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the villagers) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42009181"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009181">181</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “did not receive”; this verb, <span class="greek">δέχομαι</span> (<span class="translit">dechomai</span>), is a term of hospitality or welcome (L&amp;N 34.53).</p></p>
<p id="n42009182"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009182">182</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because his face was set toward Jerusalem.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Jerusalem</i> is to be the place of rejection, as Luke 9:44 suggested. Jesus had resolved to meet his fate in Jerusalem, so the rejection was no surprise.</p></p>
<p id="n42009183"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009183">183</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “destroy.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009184"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009184">184</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially the later ones (A C D W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it), read here “as also Elijah did,” making the allusion to 2 Kgs 1:10, 12, 14 more explicit. The shorter reading has better and earlier support (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45,75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L <span class="greek">Ξ</span> 579 700* 1241 lat sa). It is difficult to explain how the shorter reading could have arisen from the longer, especially since it is well represented early on. However, the longer reading looks to have been a marginal note originally, incorporated into the text of Luke by early scribes.</p><p><b>sn</b> An allusion to 2 Kgs 1:10, 12, 14.</p></p>
<p id="n42009185"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009185">185</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42009186"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009186">186</a> <p><b>tc</b> Many <span class="smcaps">mss</span> ([D] K <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> [579] 700 2542 <i>pm</i> it) have at the end of the verse (with slight variations) “and he said, ‘You do not know what sort of spirit you are of, for the Son of Man did not come to destroy people’s lives, but to save [them].’” This variant is clearly secondary, as it gives some content to the rebuke. Further, it is difficult to explain how such rich material would have been omitted by the rest of the witnesses, including the earliest and best <span class="smcaps">mss</span>. </p><p><b>sn</b> The point of the rebuke is that now was not the time for judgment but patience; see 2 Pet 3:9.</p></p>
<p id="n42009187"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009187">187</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And as.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42009188"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009188">188</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going,” but “walking” is an accurate description of how they traveled about.</p></p>
<p id="n42009189"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009189">189</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A C W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) add <span class="greek">κύριε</span> (<span class="translit">kurie</span>, “Lord”) here, but scribes were prone to add to the text, especially appellations for the Lord. The shorter reading also enjoys significant ms support (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45,75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D L <span class="greek">Ξ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> lat co).</p><p><b>sn</b> The statement “<i>I will follow you wherever you go</i>” is an offer to follow Jesus as a disciple, no matter what the cost.</p></p>
<p id="n42009190"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009190">190</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the wild birds”; <i>Grk</i> “the birds of the sky” or “the birds of the heaven”; the Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) may be translated either “sky” or “heaven,” depending on the context. The idiomatic expression “birds of the sky” refers to wild birds as opposed to domesticated fowl (cf. BDAG 809 s.v. <span class="greek">πετεινόν</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n42009191"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009191">191</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ reply is simply this: Does the man understand the rejection he will be facing? Jesus has no home in the world (<i>the Son of Man has no place to lay his head</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n42009192"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009192">192</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42009193"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009193">193</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009194"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009194">194</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42009195"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009195">195</a> <p><b>sn</b> There are several options for the meaning of Jesus’ reply <i>Let the dead bury their own dead</i>: (1) Recent research suggests that burial customs in the vicinity of Jerusalem from about 20 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> to <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 70 involved a reinterment of the bones a year after the initial burial, once the flesh had rotted away. At that point the son would have placed his father’s bones in a special box known as an ossuary to be set into the wall of the tomb. (See, e.g., C. A. Evans, <i>Jesus and the Ossuaries</i>, 26-30.) Thus Jesus could well be rebuking the man for wanting to wait around for as much as a year before making a commitment to follow him. In 1st century Jewish culture, to have followed Jesus rather than burying one’s father would have seriously dishonored one’s father (cf. Tobit 4:3-4). (2) The remark is an idiom (possibly a proverbial saying) that means, “The matter in question is not the real issue,” in which case Jesus was making a wordplay on the wording of the man’s (literal) request (see L&amp;N 33.137). (3) This remark could be a figurative reference to various kinds of people, meaning, “Let the spiritually dead bury the dead.” (4) It could also be literal and designed to shock the hearer by the surprise of the contrast. Whichever option is preferred, it is clear that the most important priority is to preach the gospel (<i>proclaim the kingdom of God</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n42009196"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009196">196</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n42009197"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009197">197</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And another also said.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009198"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009198">198</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to those in my house.”</p></p>
<p id="n42009199"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009199">199</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42009200"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009200">200</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the”; in context the article is used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n42009201"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009201">201</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus warns that excessive concern for family ties (<i>looks back</i>) will make the kingdom a lesser priority, which is not appropriate for discipleship. The image is graphic, for who can plow straight ahead toward a goal while looking back? Discipleship cannot be double-minded.</p></p>
<p id="n42009202"><a href="file1024.xhtml#n42009202">202</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. See the note on this phrase in v. 60.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
