<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Hebrews 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Concluding Exposition: Old and New Sacrifices Contrasted</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:1</span> For the law possesses a shadow of the good things to come but not the reality itself, and is therefore completely unable, by the same sacrifices offered continually, year after year, to perfect those who come to worship.<sup><a id="n580101" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n580101">1</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:2</span> For otherwise would they not have ceased to be offered, since the worshipers would have been purified once for all and so have<sup><a id="n580102" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n580102">2</a></sup> no further consciousness of sin? <span class="verse">10:3</span> But in those sacrifices<sup><a id="n580103" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n580103">3</a></sup> there is a reminder of sins year after year. <span class="verse">10:4</span> For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins. <span class="verse">10:5</span> So when he came into the world, he said,</p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<i><b>Sacrifice and offering you did not desire, but a body you prepared for me</b></i>.</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">10:6</span> “<i><b>Whole burnt offerings and sin-offerings you took no delight in</b></i>.</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">10:7</span> “<i><b>Then I said</b></i>, ‘<b><i>Here I am:</i></b><sup><a id="n580104" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n580104">4</a></sup> <i><b>I have come—it is written of me in the scroll of the book—to do your will, O God</b></i>.’”<sup><a id="n580105" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n580105">5</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:8</span> When he says above, “<b><i>Sacrifices and offerings</i></b> and <b><i>whole burnt offerings and sin-offerings you did not desire nor did you take delight</i></b> in them”<sup><a id="n580106" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n580106">6</a></sup> (which are offered according to the law), <span class="verse">10:9</span> then he says, “<b><i>Here I am: I have come to do your will</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n580107" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n580107">7</a></sup> He does away with<sup><a id="n580108" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n580108">8</a></sup> the first to establish the second. <span class="verse">10:10</span> By his will<sup><a id="n580109" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n580109">9</a></sup> we have been made holy through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. <span class="verse">10:11</span> And every priest stands day after day<sup><a id="n5801010" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801010">10</a></sup> serving and offering the same sacrifices again and again—sacrifices that can never take away sins. <span class="verse">10:12</span> But when this priest<sup><a id="n5801011" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801011">11</a></sup> had offered one sacrifice for sins for all time, <i>he sat down at the right hand</i><sup><a id="n5801012" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801012">12</a></sup> of God, <span class="verse">10:13</span> where he is now waiting<sup><a id="n5801013" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801013">13</a></sup> <i>until</i> <i>his enemies are made a footstool for his feet</i>.<sup><a id="n5801014" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801014">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:14</span> For by one offering he has perfected for all time those who are made holy. <span class="verse">10:15</span> And the Holy Spirit also witnesses to us, for after saying,<sup><a id="n5801015" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801015">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:16</span> “<i><b>This is the covenant that I will establish with them after those days, says the Lord</b>. <b>I will put</b></i><sup><a id="n5801016" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801016">16</a></sup> <b><i>my</i></b> <b><i>laws on their hearts and I will inscribe them on their minds</i></b>,”<sup><a id="n5801017" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801017">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:17</span> then he says,<sup><a id="n5801018" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801018">18</a></sup> “<b><i>Their sins and their lawless deeds I will remember no longer</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n5801019" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801019">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:18</span> Now where there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer any offering for sin. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Drawing Near to God in Enduring Faith</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:19</span> Therefore, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5801020" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801020">20</a></sup> since we have confidence to enter the sanctuary by the blood of Jesus, <span class="verse">10:20</span> by the fresh and living way that he inaugurated for us<sup><a id="n5801021" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801021">21</a></sup> through the curtain, that is, through his flesh,<sup><a id="n5801022" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801022">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:21</span> and since we have a great priest<sup><a id="n5801023" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801023">23</a></sup> over the house of God, <span class="verse">10:22</span> let us draw near with a sincere heart in the assurance that faith brings,<sup><a id="n5801024" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801024">24</a></sup> because we have had our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience<sup><a id="n5801025" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801025">25</a></sup> and our bodies washed in pure water. <span class="verse">10:23</span> And let us hold unwaveringly to the hope that we confess, for the one who made the promise is trustworthy. <span class="verse">10:24</span> And let us take thought of how to spur one another on to love and good works,<sup><a id="n5801026" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801026">26</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:25</span> not abandoning our own meetings, as some are in the habit of doing, but encouraging each other, and even more so because you see the day<sup><a id="n5801027" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801027">27</a></sup> drawing near.<sup><a id="n5801028" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801028">28</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:26</span> For if we deliberately keep on sinning after receiving the knowledge of the truth, no further sacrifice for sins is left for us,<sup><a id="n5801029" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801029">29</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:27</span> but only a certain fearful expectation of judgment and <i>a fury</i><sup><a id="n5801030" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801030">30</a></sup> <i>of fire that will consume God’s enemies</i>.<sup><a id="n5801031" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801031">31</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:28</span> Someone who rejected the law of Moses was put to death<sup><a id="n5801032" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801032">32</a></sup> without mercy <i>on the testimony of two or three witnesses</i>.<sup><a id="n5801033" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801033">33</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:29</span> How much greater punishment do you think that person deserves who has contempt for<sup><a id="n5801034" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801034">34</a></sup> the Son of God, and profanes<sup><a id="n5801035" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801035">35</a></sup> the blood of the covenant that made him holy,<sup><a id="n5801036" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801036">36</a></sup> and insults the Spirit of grace? <span class="verse">10:30</span> For we know the one who said, “<i><b>Vengeance is mine, I will repay</b></i>,”<sup><a id="n5801037" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801037">37</a></sup> and again, “<b><i>The Lord will judge his people</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n5801038" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801038">38</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:31</span> It is a terrifying thing to fall into the hands of the living God. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:32</span> But remember the former days when you endured a harsh conflict of suffering after you were enlightened. <span class="verse">10:33</span> At times you were publicly exposed to abuse and afflictions, and at other times you came to share with others who were treated in that way. <span class="verse">10:34</span> For in fact you shared the sufferings of those in prison,<sup><a id="n5801039" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801039">39</a></sup> and you accepted the confiscation of your belongings with joy, because you knew that you certainly<sup><a id="n5801040" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801040">40</a></sup> had a better and lasting possession. <span class="verse">10:35</span> So do not throw away your confidence, because it<sup><a id="n5801041" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801041">41</a></sup> has great reward. <span class="verse">10:36</span> For you need endurance in order to do God’s will and so receive what is promised.<sup><a id="n5801042" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801042">42</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:37</span> For <b><i>just a little longer</i></b><sup><a id="n5801043" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801043">43</a></sup> and <b><i>he who is coming will arrive and not delay</i></b>.<sup><a id="n5801044" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801044">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:38</span> <i><b>But</b></i> <i><b>my righteous one will live by faith, and if he shrinks back, I</b></i><sup><a id="n5801045" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801045">45</a></sup> <b><i>take</i></b> <b><i>no pleasure in him</i></b>.<sup><a id="n5801046" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801046">46</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:39</span> But we are not among those who shrink back and thus perish, but are among those who have faith and preserve their souls.<sup><a id="n5801047" href="file1201_notes.xhtml#n5801047">47</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>