<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Corinthians 12</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Corinthians<br />Chapter 12</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Spiritual Gifts</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:1</span> With regard to spiritual gifts,<sup><a id="n460121" href="file1120_notes.xhtml#n460121">1</a></sup> brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n460122" href="file1120_notes.xhtml#n460122">2</a></sup> I do not want you to be uninformed.<sup><a id="n460123" href="file1120_notes.xhtml#n460123">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:2</span> You know that when you were pagans you were often led astray by speechless idols, however you were led. <span class="verse">12:3</span> So I want you to understand that no one speaking by the Spirit of God says, “Jesus is cursed,” and no one can say, “Jesus is Lord,” except by the Holy Spirit. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:4</span> Now there are different gifts, but the same Spirit. <span class="verse">12:5</span> And there are different ministries, but the same Lord. <span class="verse">12:6</span> And there are different results, but the same God who produces all of them in everyone. <span class="verse">12:7</span> To each person the manifestation of the Spirit is given for the benefit of all. <span class="verse">12:8</span> For one person is given through the Spirit the message of wisdom, and another the message of knowledge according to the same Spirit, <span class="verse">12:9</span> to another faith by the same Spirit, and to another gifts of healing by the one Spirit, <span class="verse">12:10</span> to another performance of miracles, to another prophecy, and to another discernment of spirits, to another different kinds of tongues, and to another the interpretation of tongues. <span class="verse">12:11</span> It is one and the same Spirit, distributing as he decides to each person, who produces all these things. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Different Members in One Body</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:12</span> For just as the body is one and yet has many members, and all the members of the body—though many—are one body, so too is Christ. <span class="verse">12:13</span> For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body. Whether Jews or Greeks or slaves<sup><a id="n460124" href="file1120_notes.xhtml#n460124">4</a></sup> or free, we were all made to drink of the one Spirit. <span class="verse">12:14</span> For in fact the body is not a single member, but many. <span class="verse">12:15</span> If the foot says, “Since I am not a hand, I am not part of the body,” it does not lose its membership in the body because of that. <span class="verse">12:16</span> And if the ear says, “Since I am not an eye, I am not part of the body,” it does not lose its membership in the body because of that. <span class="verse">12:17</span> If the whole body were an eye, what part would do the hearing? If the whole were an ear, what part would exercise the sense of smell? <span class="verse">12:18</span> But as a matter of fact, God has placed each of the members in the body just as he decided. <span class="verse">12:19</span> If they were all the same member, where would the body be? <span class="verse">12:20</span> So now there are many members, but one body. <span class="verse">12:21</span> The eye cannot say to the hand, “I do not need you,” nor in turn can the head say to the foot, “I do not need you.” <span class="verse">12:22</span> On the contrary, those members that seem to be weaker are essential, <span class="verse">12:23</span> and those members we consider less honorable we clothe with greater honor, and our unpresentable members are clothed with dignity,<sup><a id="n460125" href="file1120_notes.xhtml#n460125">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:24</span> but our presentable members do not need this. Instead, God has blended together the body, giving greater honor to the lesser member, <span class="verse">12:25</span> so that there may be no division in the body, but the members may have mutual concern for one another. <span class="verse">12:26</span> If one member suffers, everyone suffers with it. If a<sup><a id="n460126" href="file1120_notes.xhtml#n460126">6</a></sup> member is honored, all rejoice with it.</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">12:27</span> Now you are Christ’s body, and each of you is a member of it. <span class="verse">12:28</span> And God has placed in the church first apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then miracles, gifts of healing, helps, gifts of leadership, different kinds of tongues. <span class="verse">12:29</span> Not all are apostles, are they? Not all are prophets, are they? Not all are teachers, are they? Not all perform miracles, do they? <span class="verse">12:30</span> Not all have gifts of healing, do they? Not all speak in tongues, do they? Not all interpret, do they?<sup><a id="n460127" href="file1120_notes.xhtml#n460127">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">12:31</span> But you should be eager for the greater gifts.</p>
<p class="bodytext">And now I will show you a way that is beyond comparison.<sup><a id="n460128" href="file1120_notes.xhtml#n460128">8</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>