<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 3</h2>
<p id="n660031"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n660031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated due to differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n660032"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n660032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “the following” after “write” is supplied to clarify that what follows is the content of what is to be written.</p></p>
<p id="n660033"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n660033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “These things says [the One]…” See the note on the phrase “this is the solemn pronouncement of” in 2:1.</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>This is the solemn pronouncement of</i> reflects an OT idiom. See the note on this phrase in 2:1.</p></p>
<p id="n660034"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n660034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who has” (cf. 1:16).</p></p>
<p id="n660035"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n660035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a name.”</p></p>
<p id="n660036"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n660036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n660037"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n660037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The prepositional phrase “in reality” is supplied in the translation to make explicit the idea that their being alive was only an illusion.</p></p>
<p id="n660038"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n660038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἔμελλον</span> (<span class="translit">emellon</span>) is in the imperfect tense.</p></p>
<p id="n660039"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n660039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The perfect passive participle has been translated as an intensive (resultative) perfect here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600310"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the judgment.” BDAG 342 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐνώπιον</span> 3 states, “<i>in the opinion/judgment of</i>…As a rule…of <span class="greek">θεός</span> or <span class="greek">κύριος</span>; so after…<span class="greek">πεπληρωμένος</span> Rv 3:2.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600311"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression <span class="greek">πῶς εἴληφας καὶ ἤκουσας</span> (<span class="translit">pōs eilēphas kai ēkousas</span>) probably refers to the initial instruction in the Christian life they had received and been taught; this included doctrine and ethical teaching.</p></p>
<p id="n6600312"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “keep it,” in the sense of obeying what they had initially been taught.</p></p>
<p id="n6600313"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The negation here is with <span class="greek">οὐ μή</span> (<span class="translit">ou mē</span>, the strongest possible form of negation in Koine Greek).</p></p>
<p id="n6600314"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “come on.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600315"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a few names”; here <span class="greek">ὄνομα</span> (<span class="translit">onoma</span>) is used by figurative extension to mean “person” or “people”; according to L&amp;N 9.19 there is “the possible implication of existence or relevance as individuals.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600316"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “soiled” (so NAB, NRSV, NIV); NCV “have kept their clothes unstained”; CEV “have not dirtied your clothes with sin.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600317"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “dressed” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n6600318"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who overcomes.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600319"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “thus.” </p></p>
<p id="n6600320"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “white robes.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600321"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The negation here is with <span class="greek">οὐ μή</span> (<span class="translit">ou mē</span>), the strongest possible form of negation in Koine Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n6600322"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will never wipe out.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600323"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6600324"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600324">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will confess.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600325"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated due to differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600326"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “the following” after “write” is supplied to clarify that what follows is the content of what is to be written.</p></p>
<p id="n6600327"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “These things says [the One]…” See the note on the phrase “this is the solemn pronouncement of” in 2:1.</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>This is the solemn pronouncement of</i> reflects an OT idiom. See the note on this phrase in 2:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6600328"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600328">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “door” is not in the Greek text but has been supplied in the translation. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context. Since the following verse does contain the word “door” (<span class="greek">θύραν</span>, <span class="translit">thuran</span>), that word has been supplied as the direct object here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600329"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “door” earlier in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n6600330"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600330">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I have given.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600331"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600331">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to shut it,” but English would leave the direct object understood in this case. </p><p><b>sn</b> The entire statement is parenthetical, interrupting the construction found in other letters to the churches in 3:1 and 3:15, “I know your deeds, that…” where an enumeration of the deeds follows.</p></p>
<p id="n6600332"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600332">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> This translation is based on connecting the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) clause with the <span class="greek">οἶδα</span> (<span class="translit">oida</span>) at the beginning of the verse, giving the content of what is known (see also 3:1, 15 for parallels). Because of the intervening clause that is virtually parenthetical (see the note on the word “shut” earlier in this verse), the words “I know that” from the beginning of the verse had to be repeated to make this connection clear for the English reader. However, the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> could be understood as introducing a causal subordinate clause instead and thus translated, “because you have.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600333"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600333">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “little power.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600334"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600334">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6600335"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600335">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and having kept.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐτήρησας</span> (<span class="translit">etērēsas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. For the translation of <span class="greek">τηρέω</span> (<span class="translit">tēreō</span>) as “obey” see L&amp;N 36.19. This is the same word that is used in 3:10 (there translated “kept”) where there is a play on words.</p></p>
<p id="n6600336"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600336">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold” (L&amp;N 91.13).</p></p>
<p id="n6600337"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600337">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 2:9.</p></p>
<p id="n6600338"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600338">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “yet” to indicate the contrast between what these people claimed and what they were.</p></p>
<p id="n6600339"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600339">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb here is <span class="greek">ποιέω</span> (<span class="translit">poieō</span>), but in this context it has virtually the same meaning as <span class="greek">δίδωμι</span> (<span class="translit">didōmi</span>) used at the beginning of the verse. Stylistic variation like this is typical of Johannine literature.</p></p>
<p id="n6600340"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600340">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb here is <span class="greek">προσκυνήσουσιν</span> (<span class="translit">proskunēsousin</span>), normally used to refer to worship.</p></p>
<p id="n6600341"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600341">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and know,” “and recognize.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600342"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600342">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “obey.” For the translation of <span class="greek">τηρέω</span> (<span class="translit">tēreō</span>) as “obey” see L&amp;N 36.19. In the Greek there is a wordplay: “because you have kept my word…I will keep you,” though the meaning of <span class="greek">τηρέω</span> is different each time.</p></p>
<p id="n6600343"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600343">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">λόγον</span> (<span class="translit">logon</span>) is understood here in the sense of admonition or encouragement. </p></p>
<p id="n6600344"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600344">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to persevere.” Here <span class="greek">ὑπομονῆς</span> (<span class="translit">hupomonēs</span>) has been translated as a genitive of reference/respect related to <span class="greek">τὸν λόγον</span> (<span class="translit">ton logon</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6600345"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600345">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the verb <span class="greek">λάβῃ</span> (<span class="translit">labē</span>) here BDAG 583 s.v. <span class="greek">λαμβάνω</span> 2 states, “to take away<i>, remove</i>…with or without the use of force <span class="greek">τὰ ἀργύρια</span> <i>take away the silver coins</i> (fr. the temple) Mt 27:6. <span class="greek">τὰς ἀσθενείας</span> <i>diseases</i> 8:17. <span class="greek">τὸν στέφανον</span> Rv 3:11.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600346"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600346">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Your crown</i> refers to a wreath consisting either of foliage or of precious metals formed to resemble foliage and worn as a symbol of honor, victory, or as a badge of high office—‘wreath, crown’ (L&amp;N 6.192).</p></p>
<p id="n6600347"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600347">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who is victorious”; traditionally, “who overcomes.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600348"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600348">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I will make him,” but the pronoun (<span class="greek">αὐτόν</span>, <span class="translit">auton</span>, “him”) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600349"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600349">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600350"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600350">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> This description of <i>the city of my God</i> is parenthetical, explaining further the previous phrase and interrupting the list of “new names” given here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600351"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600351">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated due to differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600352"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600352">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “the following” after “write” is supplied to clarify that what follows is the content of what is to be written.</p></p>
<p id="n6600353"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600353">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “These things says [the One]…” See the note on the phrase “this is the solemn pronouncement of” in 2:1.</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>This is the solemn pronouncement of</i> reflects an OT idiom. See the note on this phrase in 2:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6600354"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600354">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the beginning of God’s creation”; or “the ruler of God’s creation.” From a linguistic standpoint all three meanings for <span class="greek">ἀρχή</span> (<span class="translit">archē</span>) are possible. The term is well attested in both LXX (Gen 40:13, 21; 41:13) and intertestamental Jewish literature (2 Macc 4:10, 50) as meaning “<i>ruler, authority</i>” (BDAG 138 s.v. 6). Some have connected this passage to Paul’s statements in Col 1:15, 18 which describe Christ as <span class="greek">ἀρχή</span> and <span class="greek">πρωτότοκος</span> (<span class="translit">prōtotokos</span>; e.g., see R. H. Mounce, <i>Revelation</i> [NICNT], 124) but the term <span class="greek">ἀρχή</span> has been understood as either “beginning” or “ruler” in that passage as well. The most compelling connection is to be found in the prologue to John’s Gospel (1:2-4) where the <span class="greek">λόγος</span> (<span class="translit">logos</span>) is said to be “in the beginning (<span class="greek">ἀρχή</span>) with God,” a temporal reference connected with creation, and then v. 3 states that “all things were made through him.” The connection with the original creation suggests the meaning “originator” for <span class="greek">ἀρχή</span> here. BDAG 138 s.v. 3 gives the meaning “the first cause” for the word in Rev 3:14, a term that is too philosophical for the general reader, so the translation “originator” was used instead. BDAG also notes, “but the mng. <i>beginning</i> = ‘first created’ is linguistically probable (s. above 1b and Job 40:19; also CBurney, Christ as the <span class="greek">᾿Αρχή</span> of Creation: JTS 27, 1926, 160-77).” Such a meaning is unlikely here, however, since the connections described above are much more probable.</p></p>
<p id="n6600355"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600355">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> Laodicea was near two other towns, each of which had a unique water source. To the north was Hierapolis which had a natural hot spring, often used for medicinal purposes. To the east was Colossae which had cold, pure waters. In contrast to these towns, Laodicea had no permanent supply of good water. Efforts to pipe water to the city from nearby springs were successful, but it would arrive lukewarm. The metaphor in the text is not meant to relate spiritual fervor to temperature. This would mean that Laodicea would be commended for being spiritually cold, but it is unlikely that Jesus would commend this. Instead, the metaphor condemns Laodicea for not providing spiritual healing (being hot) or spiritual refreshment (being cold) to those around them. It is a condemnation of their lack of works and lack of witness.</p></p>
<p id="n6600356"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600356">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I intend.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600357"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600357">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is the literal meaning of the Greek verb <span class="greek">ἐμέω</span> (<span class="translit">emeō</span>). It is usually translated with a much weaker term like “spit out” due to the unpleasant connotations of the English verb “vomit,” as noted by L&amp;N 23.44. The situation confronting the Laodicean church is a dire one, however, and such a term is necessary if the modern reader is to understand the gravity of the situation.</p></p>
<p id="n6600358"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600358">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and have become rich.” The semantic domains of the two terms for wealth here, <span class="greek">πλούσιος</span> (<span class="translit">plousios</span>, adjective) and <span class="greek">πλουτέω</span> (<span class="translit">plouteō</span>, verb) overlap considerably, but are given slightly different English translations for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n6600359"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600359">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6600360"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600360">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> All the terms in this series are preceded by <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) in the Greek text, but contemporary English generally uses connectives only between the last two items in such a series.</p></p>
<p id="n6600361"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600361">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I counsel you to buy.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600362"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600362">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “rich, and.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation, repeating the words “Buy from me” to make the connection clear for the English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n6600363"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600363">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the shame of the nakedness of you,” which has been translated as an attributed genitive like <span class="greek">καινότητι ζωῆς</span> (<span class="translit">kainotēti zōēs</span>) in Rom 6:4 (<i>ExSyn</i> 89-90).</p></p>
<p id="n6600364"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600364">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> The city of Laodicea had a famous medical school and exported a powder (called a “Phrygian powder”) that was widely used as an <i>eye salve</i>. It was applied to the eyes in the form of a paste the consistency of dough (the Greek term for the salve here, <span class="greek">κολλούριον</span>, <span class="translit">kollourion</span> [Latin <i>collyrium</i>], is a diminutive form of the word for a long roll of bread).</p></p>
<p id="n6600365"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600365">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek pronoun <span class="greek">ὅσος</span> (<span class="translit">hosos</span>) means “as many as” and can be translated “All those” or “Everyone.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600366"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600366">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600367"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600367">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “come in to him.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression in Greek does not mean entrance into the person, as is popularly taken, but entrance into a room or building <i>toward</i> the person. See <i>ExSyn</i> 380-82. Some interpreters understand the <i>door</i> here to be the door to the Laodicean church, and thus a collective or corporate image rather than an individual one.</p></p>
<p id="n6600368"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600368">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The one who conquers, to him I will grant.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600369"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600369">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who is victorious”; traditionally, “who overcomes.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600370"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600370">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I will give [grant] to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600371"><a href="file1236.xhtml#n6600371">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “have been victorious”; traditionally, “have overcome.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
