<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 25</h2>
<p id="n440251"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n440251">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 736-37 s.v. <span class="greek">οὖν</span> 2.b states, “<span class="greek">οὖν</span> serves to indicate a transition to someth. new…<i>now, then, well</i>…Ac 25:1.”</p></p>
<p id="n440252"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n440252">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n440254"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n440254">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1. This was a journey of 65 mi (just over 100 km).</p></p>
<p id="n440255"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n440255">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 893-94 s.v. <span class="greek">πρῶτος</span> 2.a.<span class="greek">β</span> has “<span class="greek">οἱ πρῶτοι</span> <i>the most prominent men, the leading men</i> w. gen. of the place…or of a group…<span class="greek">οἱ πρ</span>.<span class="greek"> τοῦ λαοῦ</span>…Lk 19:47; cp. Ac 25:2; 28:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n440256"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n440256">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 326 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐμφανίζω</span> 3 has “<span class="greek">ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> τινὶ κατά τινος</span> <i>bring formal charges against someone</i>…Ac 24:1; 25:2.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Note how quickly the Jewish leadership went after Paul: They brought <i>formal charges against him</i> within three days of Festus’ arrival in the province.</p></p>
<p id="n440257"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n440257">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Requesting a favor against him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation, the understood direct object of “requesting” has been supplied, and the phrase “to do them” supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n440258"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n440258">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Festus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. The words “they urged him” are in v. 2 in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n440259"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n440259">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Planning an ambush</i>. The Jewish leadership had not forgotten the original plan of several years ago (see 23:16). They did not trust the Roman legal process, but preferred to take matters into their own hands.</p></p>
<p id="n4402510"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402510">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402511"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402511">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402512"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “there” is not in the Greek text but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4402513"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let those who are influential among you” (i.e., the powerful).</p></p>
<p id="n4402514"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “there” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4402515"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and if there is anything wrong with this man,” but this could be misunderstood in English to mean a moral or physical defect, while the issue in context is the commission of some crime, something legally improper (BDAG 149 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄτοπος</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4402516"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 533 s.v. <span class="greek">κατηγορέω</span> 1 states, “nearly always as legal t.t.: <i>bring charges</i> in court.” L&amp;N 33.427 states for <span class="greek">κατηγορέω</span>, “to bring serious charges or accusations against someone, with the possible connotation of a legal or court context—‘to accuse, to bring charges.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402517"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Festus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402518"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Having stayed.” The participle <span class="greek">διατρίψας</span> (<span class="translit">diatripsas</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402519"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402519">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402520"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sitting down…he ordered.” The participle <span class="greek">καθίσας</span> (<span class="translit">kathisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402521"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although BDAG 175 s.v. <span class="greek">βῆμα</span> 3 gives the meaning “<i>tribunal</i>” for this verse, and a number of modern translations use similar terms (“court,” NIV; “tribunal,” NRSV), since the <span class="translit">bēma</span> was a standard feature in Greco-Roman cities of the time, there is no need for an alternative translation here.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>judgment seat</i> (<span class="greek">βῆμα</span>, <span class="translit">bēma</span>) was a raised platform mounted by steps and sometimes furnished with a seat, used by officials in addressing an assembly or making pronouncements, often on judicial matters. The judgment seat was a familiar item in Greco-Roman culture, often located in the <i>agora</i>, the public square or marketplace in the center of a city.</p></p>
<p id="n4402522"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 801 s.v. <span class="greek">περιίστημι</span> 1.a has “<span class="greek">περιέστησαν αὐτὸν οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι</span> <i>the Judeans stood around him</i> 25:7.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402523"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “many and serious.” The term <span class="greek">βαρύς</span> (<span class="translit">barus</span>) refers to weighty or serious charges (BDAG 167 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4402524"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">ἀποδείκνυμι</span> (<span class="translit">apodeiknumi</span>) in a legal context refers to legal proof (4 Macc 1:8; BDAG 108 s.v. 3).</p></p>
<p id="n4402525"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul saying in his defense”; the participle <span class="greek">ἀπολογουμένου</span> (<span class="translit">apologoumenou</span>) could be taken temporally (“when Paul said…”), but due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the participle was translated as a finite verb and a new sentence begun here in the translation. BDAG 116-17 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπολογέομαι</span> has “W. <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> foll. <span class="greek">τοῦ Παύλου ἀπολογουμένου</span>,<span class="greek"> ὅτι</span> <i>when Paul said in his defense</i> (direct quot. foll.) Ac 25:8.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402526"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I have sinned…in nothing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402527"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “against the law of the Jews.” Here <span class="greek">τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων</span> has been translated as an attributive genitive.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The Jewish law</i> refers to the law of Moses.</p></p>
<p id="n4402528"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “against the emperor” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p><p><b>sn</b> Paul’s threefold claim to be innocent with respect to <i>the law…the temple</i> and <i>Caesar</i> argues that he has not disturbed the peace at any level. This was the standard charge made against early Christians (Luke 23:2; Acts 17:6-7). The charges here are emphatically denied, with the Greek conjunction <span class="translit">oute</span> repeated before each charge.</p></p>
<p id="n4402529"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402529">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402530"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “stand trial.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402531"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402531">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “concerning these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402532"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402533"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “before the emperor’s” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p></p>
<p id="n4402534"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402534">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although BDAG 175 s.v. <span class="greek">βῆμα</span> 3 gives the meaning “<i>tribunal</i>” for this verse, and a number of modern translations use similar terms (“court,” NIV; “tribunal,” NRSV), since the <i>bema</i> was a standard feature in Greco-Roman cities of the time, there is no need for an alternative translation here. Here of course Paul’s reference to “Caesar’s judgment seat” is a form of metonymy; since Festus is Caesar’s representative, Festus’ judgment seat represents Caesar’s own.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>judgment seat</i> (<span class="greek">βῆμα</span>, <span class="translit">bēma</span>) was a raised platform mounted by steps and sometimes furnished with a seat, used by officials in addressing an assembly or making pronouncements, often on judicial matters. The judgment seat was a familiar item in Greco-Roman culture, often located in the <i>agora</i>, the public square or marketplace in the center of a city.</p></p>
<p id="n4402535"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, tried by an imperial representative and subject to Roman law.</p></p>
<p id="n4402536"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402536">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>“I have done nothing wrong.”</i> Here is yet another declaration of total innocence on Paul’s part.</p></p>
<p id="n4402537"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 506 s.v. <span class="greek">καλῶς</span> 7 states, “comp. <span class="greek">κάλλιον</span> (for the superl., as Galen, Protr. 8 p. 24, 19J.=p. 10, 31 Kaibel; s. B-D-F §244, 2) <span class="greek">ὡς καί σὺ κ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἐπιγινώσκεις</span> <i>as also you know very well</i> Ac 25:10.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402538"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 20 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδικέω</span> 1.b has “intr. <i>be in the wrong</i> (Ex 2:13) <span class="greek">εἰ ἀδικῶ</span> Ac 25:11.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402539"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402539">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 764 s.v. <span class="greek">παραιτέομαι</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">β</span>, “<span class="greek">οὐ παραιτοῦμαι τὸ ἀποθανεῖν</span> <i>I am not trying to escape death</i> Ac 25:11 (cf. Jos., Vi. 141).” To avoid redundancy in the translation, the English gerund “dying” is used to translate the Greek infinitive <span class="greek">ἀποθανεῖν</span> (<span class="translit">apothanein</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402540"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402540">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “but if there is nothing to their charges against me.” Both “if” clauses in this verse are first class conditions. Paul stated the options without prejudice, assuming in turn the reality of each for the sake of the argument.</p></p>
<p id="n4402541"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402541">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, no one can hand me over to them lawfully. Paul was aware of the dangers of a return to Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n4402542"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402542">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the emperor” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>appeal to Caesar</i> was known as the <i>provocatio ad Caesarem</i>. It was a Roman citizen’s right to ask for a direct judgment by the emperor (Pliny the Younger, <i>Letters</i> 10.96). It was one of the oldest rights of Roman citizens.</p></p>
<p id="n4402543"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, with his advisers.</p></p>
<p id="n4402544"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402544">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402545"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402545">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the emperor” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p></p>
<p id="n4402546"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402546">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the emperor.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402547"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402547">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>“To Caesar you will go!”</i> In all probability Festus was pleased to send Paul on to Rome and get this political problem out of his court.</p></p>
<p id="n4402548"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402548">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>King Agrippa</i> was Herod Agrippa II (<span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 27-92/93), son of Herod Agrippa I (see Acts 12:1). He ruled over parts of Palestine from <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 53 until his death. His sister Bernice was widowed when her second husband, Herod King of Chalcis, died in <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 48. From then she lived with her brother. In an attempt to quiet rumors of an incestuous relationship between them, she resolved to marry Polemo of Cilicia, but she soon left him and returned to Herod Agrippa II. Their incestuous relationship became the gossip of Rome according to Josephus (<i>Ant</i>. 20.7.3 [20.145-147]). The visit of Agrippa and Bernice gave Festus the opportunity to get some internal Jewish advice. Herod Agrippa II was a trusted adviser because he was known to be very loyal to Rome (Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 2.16.4 [2.345-401]).</p></p>
<p id="n4402549"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402549">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402550"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402550">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 144 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀσπάζομαι</span> 1.b states, “Of official visits <i>pay one</i>’<i>s respects to</i>…Ac 25:13.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402551"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402551">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402552"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402552">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1105-6 s.v. <span class="greek">ὡς</span> 8.b states, “w. pres. or impf. <i>while, when, as long as</i>…Ac 1:10; 7:23; 9:23; 10:17; 13:25; 19:9; 21:27; 25:14.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402553"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402553">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402554"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402554">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Festus laid Paul’s case before the king for consideration.” BDAG 74 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνατίθημι</span> 2 states, “otherw. only mid. to lay someth. before someone for consideration, <i>communicate, refer, declare</i> w. connotation of request for a person’s opinion…Ac 25:14.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402556"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402556">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 326 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐμφανίζω</span> 3 has “to convey a formal report about a judicial matter, <i>present evidence, bring charges</i>…<span class="greek">ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> περί τινος</span> <i>concerning someone</i> 25:15.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402557"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402557">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about whom.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) has been replaced with a personal pronoun (“him”) and a new sentence started in the translation at the beginning of v. 15 (where the phrase <span class="greek">περὶ οὗ</span> [<span class="translit">peri hou</span>] occurs in the Greek text).</p></p>
<p id="n4402558"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402558">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 516 s.v. <span class="greek">καταδίκη</span> states, “<i>condemnation, sentence of condemnation, conviction, guilty verdict</i>…<span class="greek">αἰτεῖσθαι κατά τινος κ</span>. <i>ask for a conviction of someone</i> Ac 25:15.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402559"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402559">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to whom I answered.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) has been replaced with a personal pronoun (“them”) and a new sentence started in the translation at the beginning of v. 16.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>“I answered them.”</i> In the answer that follows, Festus is portrayed in a more positive light, being sensitive to justice and Roman law.</p></p>
<p id="n4402560"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402560">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “any man.” This is a generic use of <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402561"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402561">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has met his accusers in person.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402562"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402562">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and receives.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402563"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402563">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “indictment” (a legal technical term). BDAG 273-74 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔγκλημα</span> 1 states, “legal t.t.…<span class="greek">ἀπολογία περὶ τοῦ ἐ</span>. <i>defense against the accusation</i> Ac 25:16.” L&amp;N 56.6 defines <span class="greek">ἔγκλημα</span> (<span class="translit">enklēma</span>) as “(a technical, legal term) a formal indictment or accusation brought against someone—‘indictment, accusation, case.’…‘and might receive an opportunity for a defense against the indictment’ Ac 25:16.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402564"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402564">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 969-70 s.v. <span class="greek">συνέρχομαι</span> 2 states, “<span class="greek">συνελθόντων ἐνθάδε</span> prob. means (because of <span class="greek">συνκαταβάντες</span> 25:5) <i>they came back here with (me)</i> 25:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402565"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402565">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 59 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναβολή</span> states, “‘delay’…legal t.t. <i>postponement</i>…<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> μηδεμίαν ποιησάμενος</span> <i>I did not postpone the matter</i> Ac 25:17.” “Case” has been supplied instead of “matter” since it is more specific to the context. The participle <span class="greek">ποιησάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">poiēsamenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402566"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402566">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sitting…I ordered.” The participle <span class="greek">καθίσας</span> (<span class="translit">kathisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402567"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402567">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although BDAG 175 s.v. <span class="greek">βῆμα</span> 3 gives the meaning “<i>tribunal</i>” for this verse, and a number of modern translations use similar terms (“court,” NIV; “tribunal,” NRSV), since the <i>bema</i> was a standard feature in Greco-Roman cities of the time, there is no need for an alternative translation here.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>judgment seat</i> (<span class="greek">βῆμα</span>, <span class="translit">bēma</span>) was a raised platform mounted by steps and sometimes furnished with a seat, used by officials in addressing an assembly or making pronouncements, often on judicial matters. The judgment seat was a familiar item in Greco-Roman culture, often located in the <i>agora</i>, the public square or marketplace in the center of a city.</p></p>
<p id="n4402568"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402568">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they brought no charge of any of the evil deeds.” BDAG 31 s.v. <span class="greek">αἰτία</span> 3.b has “<span class="greek">αἰτίαν φέρειν</span>…<i>bring an accusation</i> Ac 25:18.” Since <span class="greek">κατήγοροι</span> (<span class="translit">katēgoroi</span>, “accusers”) in the previous clause is somewhat redundant with this, “charge” was used instead.</p></p>
<p id="n4402569"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402569">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I was expecting.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402570"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402570">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “several controversial issues.” BDAG 428 s.v. <span class="greek">ζήτημα</span> states, “in our lit. only in Ac, w. the mng. it still has in Mod. Gk. <i>(controversial) question, issue, argument</i>…Ac 15:2; 26:3. <span class="greek">ζ</span>.<span class="greek"> περί τινος</span> <i>questions about someth</i>.…18:15; 25:19.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402571"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402571">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term see BDAG 216 s.v. <span class="greek">δεισιδαιμονία</span> 2. It is a broad term for religion.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>About their own religion</i>. Festus made it clear that in his view as a neutral figure (and as one Luke had noted was disposed to help the Jews), he saw no guilt in Paul. The issue was a simple religious dispute.</p></p>
<p id="n4402572"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402572">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a certain Jesus.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402573"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402573">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “asserted.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402574"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402574">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Because I was undecided.” <i>Grk</i> “Being at a loss.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀπορούμενος</span> (<span class="translit">aporoumenos</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4402575"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402575">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 27.34 states, “<span class="greek">ἀπορούμενος δὲ ἐγὼ τὴν περὶ τούτων ζήτησιν</span> ‘I was undecided about how I could get information on these matters’ Ac 25:20. The clause ‘about how I could get information on these matters’ may also be rendered as ‘about how I should try to find out about these matters’ or ‘about how I could learn about these matters.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4402576"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402576">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “stand trial.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402577"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402577">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402578"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402578">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> A designation of the Roman emperor (in this case, Nero). BDAG 917 s.v. <span class="greek">σεβαστός</span> states, “<span class="greek">ὁ Σεβαστός</span> <i>His Majesty the Emperor</i> Ac 25:21, 25 (of Nero).” It was a translation into Greek of the Latin “Augustus.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402579"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402579">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the emperor” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p></p>
<p id="n4402580"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402580">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on King <i>Agrippa</i> in 25:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4402581"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402581">81</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402582"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402582">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402583"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402583">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on King <i>Agrippa</i> in 25:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4402584"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402584">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “great pageantry” (BDAG 1049 s.v. <span class="greek">φαντασία</span>; the term is a NT <i>hapax legomenon</i>).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp</i>. The “royals” were getting their look at Paul. Everyone who was anyone would have been there.</p></p>
<p id="n4402585"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402585">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “auditorium.” “Auditorium” may suggest to the modern English reader a theater where performances are held. Here it is the large hall where a king or governor would hold audiences. </p></p>
<p id="n4402586"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402586">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarchs” (officers in command of a thousand soldiers). In Greek the term <span class="greek">χιλίαρχος</span> (<span class="translit">chiliarchos</span>) literally described the “commander of a thousand,” but it was used as the standard translation for the Latin <i>tribunus militum</i> or <i>tribunus militare</i>, the military tribune who commanded a cohort of 600 men.</p></p>
<p id="n4402587"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402587">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402588"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402588">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and Festus ordering, Paul was brought in.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was begun in the translation, and <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated. The participle <span class="greek">κελεύσαντος</span> (<span class="translit">keleusantos</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402589"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402589">89</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402590"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402590">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>King Agrippa</i> in 25:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4402591"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402591">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Probably best understood as rhetorical hyperbole. BDAG 825 s.v. <span class="greek">πλῆθος</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">γ</span> states, “<i>people, populace, population</i>…<span class="greek">τὸ πλῆθος</span> <i>the populace</i>…<span class="greek">ἅπαν τὸ πλ</span>.<span class="greek"> τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων</span> Ac 25:24.” However, the actions of the leadership are seen by Luke as representing the actions of the entire nation, so the remark is not inaccurate.</p></p>
<p id="n4402592"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402592">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “appealed to” (BDAG 341 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐντυγχάνω</span> 1.a).</p></p>
<p id="n4402594"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402594">94</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Here</i> means “here in Caesarea.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402595"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402595">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “screaming.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402596"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402596">96</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He had done nothing that deserved death</i>. Festus’ opinion of Paul’s guilt is like Pilate’s of Jesus (Luke 23:4, 14, 22).</p></p>
<p id="n4402597"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402597">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ἐπικαλεσαμένου</span> (<span class="translit">epikalesamenou</span>) has been taken temporally. It could also be translated as causal: “and because he appealed…”</p></p>
<p id="n4402598"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402598">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> A designation of the Roman emperor (in this case, Nero). BDAG 917 s.v. <span class="greek">σεβαστός</span> states, “<span class="greek">ὁ Σεβαστός</span> <i>His Majesty the Emperor</i> Ac 25:21, 25 (of Nero).”</p></p>
<p id="n4402599"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n4402599">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “him” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n44025100"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n44025100">100</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is irony here. How can Festus write anything <i>definite</i> about Paul, if he is guilty of nothing.</p></p>
<p id="n44025101"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n44025101">101</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To my lord</i> means “to His Majesty the Emperor.”</p></p>
<p id="n44025102"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n44025102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about whom I have nothing definite…” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) was replaced with a personal pronoun (“him”) and a new sentence begun in the translation at the beginning of v. 26.</p></p>
<p id="n44025103"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n44025103">103</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>King Agrippa</i> in 25:13.</p></p>
<p id="n44025104"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n44025104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “investigation.” BDAG 66 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάκρισις</span> has “a judicial hearing, <i>investigation, hearing,</i> esp. <i>preliminary hearing</i>…<span class="greek">τῆς ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> γενομένης</span> Ac 25:26.” This is technical legal language.</p></p>
<p id="n44025105"><a href="file1087.xhtml#n44025105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 33.153 s.v. <span class="greek">σημαίνω</span>, “to cause something to be both specific and clear—‘to indicate clearly, to make clear’…‘for it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner without clearly indicating the charges against him’ Ac 25:27.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Without clearly indicating the charges against him</i>. Again the point is made by Festus himself that there is difficulty even in articulating a charge against Paul.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
