<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Matthew 28</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Matthew<br />Chapter 28</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Resurrection </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:1</span> Now after the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb. <span class="verse">28:2</span> Suddenly there was a severe earthquake, for an angel of the Lord<sup><a id="n400281" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n400281">1</a></sup> descending from heaven came and rolled away the stone and sat on it. <span class="verse">28:3</span> His<sup><a id="n400282" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n400282">2</a></sup> appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow. <span class="verse">28:4</span> The<sup><a id="n400283" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n400283">3</a></sup> guards were shaken and became like dead men because they were so afraid of him. <span class="verse">28:5</span> But the angel said<sup><a id="n400284" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n400284">4</a></sup> to the women, “Do not be afraid; I know<sup><a id="n400285" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n400285">5</a></sup> that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified.<sup><a id="n400286" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n400286">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">28:6</span> He is not here, for he has been raised,<sup><a id="n400287" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n400287">7</a></sup> just as he said. Come and see the place where he<sup><a id="n400288" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n400288">8</a></sup> was lying. <span class="verse">28:7</span> Then go quickly and tell his disciples, ‘He has been raised from the dead. He<sup><a id="n400289" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n400289">9</a></sup> is going ahead of you into Galilee. You will see him there.’ Listen, I have told you!” <span class="verse">28:8</span> So<sup><a id="n4002810" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002810">10</a></sup> they left the tomb quickly, with fear and great joy, and ran to tell his disciples. <span class="verse">28:9</span> But<sup><a id="n4002811" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002811">11</a></sup> Jesus met them, saying, “Greetings!” They<sup><a id="n4002812" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002812">12</a></sup> came to him, held on to his feet and worshiped him. <span class="verse">28:10</span> Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid. Go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee. They will see me there.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Guards’ Report</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:11</span> While<sup><a id="n4002813" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002813">13</a></sup> they were going, some<sup><a id="n4002814" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002814">14</a></sup> of the guard went into the city and told the chief priests everything that had happened. <span class="verse">28:12</span> After<sup><a id="n4002815" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002815">15</a></sup> they had assembled with the elders and formed a plan, they gave a large sum of money to the soldiers, <span class="verse">28:13</span> telling them, “You are to say, ‘His disciples came at night and stole his body<sup><a id="n4002816" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002816">16</a></sup> while we were asleep.’ <span class="verse">28:14</span> If<sup><a id="n4002817" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002817">17</a></sup> this matter is heard before the governor,<sup><a id="n4002818" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002818">18</a></sup> we will satisfy him<sup><a id="n4002819" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002819">19</a></sup> and keep you out of trouble.”<sup><a id="n4002820" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002820">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">28:15</span> So they took the money and did as they were instructed. And this story is told among the Jews to this day.<sup><a id="n4002821" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002821">21</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Great Commission</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">28:16</span> So<sup><a id="n4002822" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002822">22</a></sup> the eleven disciples went to Galilee to the mountain Jesus had designated. <span class="verse">28:17</span> When<sup><a id="n4002823" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002823">23</a></sup> they saw him, they worshiped him,<sup><a id="n4002824" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002824">24</a></sup> but some doubted.<sup><a id="n4002825" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002825">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">28:18</span> Then Jesus came up and said to them,<sup><a id="n4002826" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002826">26</a></sup> “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. <span class="verse">28:19</span> Therefore go<sup><a id="n4002827" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002827">27</a></sup> and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit,<sup><a id="n4002828" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002828">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">28:20</span> teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you. And remember,<sup><a id="n4002829" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002829">29</a></sup> I am with you<sup><a id="n4002830" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002830">30</a></sup> always, to the end of the age.”<sup><a id="n4002831" href="file997_notes.xhtml#n4002831">31</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>