<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 26</h2>
<p id="n440261"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n440261">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on King <i>Agrippa</i> in 25:13.</p></p>
<p id="n440262"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n440262">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It is permitted for you.”</p></p>
<p id="n440263"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n440263">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “extended his hand” (a speaker’s gesture).</p></p>
<p id="n440264"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n440264">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and began to speak in his own defense.”</p></p>
<p id="n440265"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n440265">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>King Agrippa</i> in 25:13.</p></p>
<p id="n440266"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n440266">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 613 s.v. <span class="greek">μάλιστα</span> 1 states, “<span class="greek">μ</span>.<span class="greek"> γνώστην ὄντα σε</span> <i>since you are outstandingly familiar</i> Ac 26:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n440267"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n440267">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “several controversial issues.” BDAG 428 s.v. <span class="greek">ζήτημα</span> states, “in our lit. only in Ac, w. the mng. it still has in Mod. Gk. <i>(controversial) question, issue, argument</i>…Ac 15:2; 26:3. <span class="greek">ζ</span>.<span class="greek"> περί τινος</span> <i>questions about someth</i>.…18:15; 25:19.”</p></p>
<p id="n440268"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n440268">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 218 s.v. <span class="greek">δέομαι</span> states, “In our lit. only w. the mng. to ask for something pleadingly, <i>ask, request</i>,” and then in section a.<span class="greek">α</span> states, “w. inf. foll.…Ac 26:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n440269"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n440269">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my manner of life.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402610"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “nation.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402612"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> These words are repeated from v. 4 (“all the Jews know”). Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, it was necessary to begin a new sentence at the beginning of v. 5 in the translation, but for this to make sense, the main verb <span class="greek">ἵσασι</span> (<span class="translit">hisasi</span>) has to be repeated to connect with the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) clause (indirect discourse) in v. 5.</p></p>
<p id="n4402613"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having known me from time past.” The participle <span class="greek">προγινώσκοντες</span> (<span class="translit">proginōskontes</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4402614"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 866 s.v. <span class="greek">προγινώσκω</span> 2 has “<i>Know from time past</i>…<span class="greek">προγινώσκοντές με ἄνωθεν</span> Ac 26:5.” L&amp;N 28.6 states, “‘they have already known me beforehand, if they are willing to testify’ Ac 26:5.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402615"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, strictest religious party. “Party” alone is used in the translation because “the strictest religious party of our religion” would be redundant.</p></p>
<p id="n4402616"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402616">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisee</i> in 5:34.</p></p>
<p id="n4402617"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 568 s.v. <span class="greek">κρίνω</span> 5.a.<span class="greek">α</span> has “<span class="greek">κρίνεσθαι ἐπί τινι</span> <i>be on trial because of a thing</i> Ac 26:6.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402618"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402619"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to which [promise] our twelve tribes…” The antecedent of the relative pronoun (the promise in v. 6) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402620"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “earnestly worship.” The object of this service, God, is omitted but implied: BDAG 587 s.v. <span class="greek">λατρεύω</span> states, “Without the dat. of the one to whom service is given: <span class="greek">ἐν ἐκτενείᾳ νύκτα κ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἡμέραν λ</span>. <i>serve (God) earnestly night and day</i> Ac 26:7.” Although clear from the context in Greek, “God” must be supplied as the recipient of the service for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4402621"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I am being accused by the Jews.” The passive construction was simplified by converting it to an active one in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402622"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402622">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O King!”</p></p>
<p id="n4402623"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402623">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate that the second person pronoun (“you”) is plural (others in addition to King Agrippa are being addressed).</p></p>
<p id="n4402624"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 568 s.v. <span class="greek">κρίνω</span> 3 states, “<span class="greek">τί ἄπιστον κρίνεται παρ᾿ ὑμῖν</span>; <i>why do you think it is incredible?</i> Ac 26:8.” The passive construction (“why is it thought unbelievable…”) has been converted to an active one to simplify the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402625"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402625">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “incredible.” BDAG 103 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄπιστος</span> 1 states, “<i>unbelievable, incredible</i>…<span class="greek">τί ἄπιστον κρίνεται παρ᾿ ὑμῖν</span>…; <i>why does it seem incredible to you?</i> Ac 26:8.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402626"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402626">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if”; <span class="greek">εἰ</span> has been translated as “that” indicating indirect discourse.</p></p>
<p id="n4402627"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 737 s.v. <span class="greek">οὖν</span> 3 states, “It has been proposed that some traces of older Gk. usage in which <span class="greek">οὖν</span> is emphatic, = <i>certainly, really, to be sure</i> etc. (s. L-S-J-M s.v. 1) remain in the pap…and in the NT…<i>indeed, of course</i> Ac 26:9.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402628"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402628">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I thought to myself.” BDAG 255 s.v. <span class="greek">δοκέω</span> 2.a has “<span class="greek">ἔδοξα ἐμαυτῷ δεῖν πρᾶξαι</span> = Lat. mihi videbar <i>I was convinced that it was necessary to do</i> Ac 26:9.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402629"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402629">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by receiving authority.” The participle <span class="greek">λαβών</span> (<span class="translit">labōn</span>) has been taken instrumentally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402630"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “cast down a pebble against them.” L&amp;N 30.103 states, “(an idiom, <i>Grk</i> ‘to bring a pebble against someone,’ a reference to a white or black pebble used in voting for or against someone) to make known one’s choice against someone—‘to vote against.’…‘when they were sentenced to death, I also voted against them’ Ac 26:10.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402631"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402631">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “when they were being executed,” but the context supports the sentencing rather than the execution itself (cf. L&amp;N 30.103).</p></p>
<p id="n4402632"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and punishing…I tried.” The participle <span class="greek">τιμωρῶν</span> (<span class="translit">timōrōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4402633"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402633">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4402634"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402634">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἠνάγκαζον</span> (<span class="translit">ēnankazon</span>) has been translated as a conative imperfect (so BDAG 60 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναγκάζω</span> 1, which has “<span class="greek">ἠνάγκαζον βλασφημεῖν</span> <i>I tried to force them to blaspheme</i> Ac 26:11”).</p></p>
<p id="n4402635"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402635">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was so insanely angry with them.” BDAG 322 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐμμαίνομαι</span> states, “to be filled with such anger that one appears to be mad, <i>be enraged</i>…<span class="greek">περισσῶς ἐμμαινόμενος αὐτοῖς</span> <i>being furiously enraged at them</i> Ac 26:11”; L&amp;N 88.182 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐμμαίνομαι</span>, “to be so furiously angry with someone as to be almost out of one’s mind—‘to be enraged, to be infuriated, to be insanely angry’…‘I was so infuriated with them that I even went to foreign cities to persecute them’ Ac 26:11.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402636"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402636">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I pursued them even as far as foreign cities.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402637"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402637">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which [activity].” Due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started at the beginning of v. 12 in the translation. The referent of the relative pronoun (“which”) was specified as “this very thing” for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402638"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402638">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going.” The participle <span class="greek">πορευόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">poreuomenos</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402639"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402639">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 37.40 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιτροπή</span> states, “the full authority to carry out an assignment or commission—‘authority, complete power.’ <span class="greek">πορευόμενος εἰς τὴν Δαμασκὸν μετ᾿ ἐξουσίας καὶ ἐπιτροπῆς τῶν ἀρχιερέων</span> ‘going to Damascus with authority and complete power from the high priests’ Ac 26:12. In Ac 26:12 the combination of <span class="greek">ἐξουσία</span> and <span class="greek">ἐπιτροπή</span> serves to reinforce the sense of complete authority.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402640"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402640">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O King.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402641"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402641">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from the sky” (the same Greek word means both “heaven” and “sky”).</p></p>
<p id="n4402642"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402642">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “everywhere” has been supplied in the translation to clarify the meaning of <span class="greek">περιλάμψαν</span> (<span class="translit">perilampsan</span>). Otherwise the modern reader might think that each of the individuals were encircled by lights or halos. See also Acts 9:7; 22:6, 9.</p></p>
<p id="n4402643"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402643">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the Hebrew language.” See Acts 22:7 and 9:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4402644"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402644">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It is hard for you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402645"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402645">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Goads” are pointed sticks used to direct a draft animal (an idiom for stubborn resistance). See BDAG 539-40 s.v. <span class="greek">κέντρον</span> 2.</p><p><b>sn</b> Sayings which contain the imagery used here (<i>kicking against the goads</i>) were also found in Greek writings; see Pindar, <i>Pythians</i> 2.94-96; Euripides, <i>Bacchae</i> 795.</p></p>
<p id="n4402646"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402646">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402647"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402647">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 30.89 has “‘to choose in advance, to select beforehand, to designate in advance.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4402648"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402648">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>As a servant and witness</i>. The commission is similar to Acts 1:8 and Luke 1:2. Paul was now an “eyewitness” of the Lord.</p></p>
<p id="n4402649"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402649">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 719 s.v. <span class="greek">ὁράω</span> A.1.b states, “W. attraction of the relative <span class="greek">ὧν</span> = <span class="greek">τούτων ἅ</span> Lk 9:36; Ac 22:15. The attraction may be due to colloq. breviloquence in <span class="greek">μάρτυρα ὧν τε εἶδες με ὧν τε ὀφθήσομαί σοι</span> <i>a witness to the things in which you saw me and to those in which I shall appear to you</i> Ac 26:16b.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402650"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402650">50</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> read “of the things in which you have seen me.” The accusative object <span class="greek">με</span> (<span class="translit">me</span>, “me”) is found after <span class="greek">εἶδές</span> (<span class="translit">eides</span>) in B C*<sup>vid</sup> 614 945 1175 1505 1739 1891 2464 sy sa; it is lacking in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C<sup>2</sup> E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 096 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt bo. The external evidence is relatively evenly divided, though there is a slight preference for the omission. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the word in brackets, indicating some doubt as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402651"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402651">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “rescuing.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the participle <span class="greek">ἐξαιρούμενος</span> (<span class="translit">exairoumenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb and a new sentence started in the translation at the beginning of v. 17.</p></p>
<p id="n4402652"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402652">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, from the Jewish people. <i>Grk</i> “the people”; the words “your own” have been supplied to clarify the meaning.</p></p>
<p id="n4402653"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402653">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> The antecedent of the relative pronoun is probably both the Jews (“your own people”) and the Gentiles, indicating the comprehensive commission Paul received.</p></p>
<p id="n4402654"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402654">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To open their eyes so that they turn…</i> Here is Luke’s most comprehensive report of Paul’s divine calling. His role was to call humanity to change their position before God and experience God’s forgiveness as a part of God’s family. The image of turning is a key one in the NT: Luke 1:79; Rom 2:19; 13:12; 2 Cor 4:6; 6:14; Eph 5:8; Col 1:12; 1 Thess 5:5. See also Luke 1:77-79; 3:3; 24:47.</p></p>
<p id="n4402655"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402655">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 352-53 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐξουσία</span> 2 states, “Also of Satan’s power Ac 26:18.” It is also possible to translate this “the domain of Satan” (cf. BDAG 353 s.v. 6)</p></p>
<p id="n4402656"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402656">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and an inheritance.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402657"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402657">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>King Agrippa</i> in 25:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4402658"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402658">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I was not disobedient</i>. Paul’s defense is that he merely obeyed the risen Jesus. He was arrested for obeying heavenly direction and preaching the opportunity to turn to God.</p></p>
<p id="n4402659"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402659">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to L&amp;N 1.5, “In Ac 26:19 the adjective <span class="greek">οὐράνιος</span> could be interpreted as being related simply to the meaning of <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span><sup>a</sup> ‘sky,’ but it seems preferable to regard <span class="greek">οὐράνιος</span> in this context as meaning simply ‘from heaven’ or ‘heavenly.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4402660"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402660">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1093-94 s.v. <span class="greek">χώρα</span> 2.b states, “of the provincial name (1 Macc 8:3) <span class="greek">ἡ χώρα τῆς ᾿Ιουδαίας</span> Ac 26:20.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402661"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402661">61</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>That they should repent and turn to God</i>. This is the shortest summary of Paul’s message that he preached.</p></p>
<p id="n4402662"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402662">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 93 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄξιος</span> 1.b, “<span class="greek">καρποὶ ἄ</span>.<span class="greek"> τῆς μετανοίας</span> <i>fruits in keeping with your repentance</i>…Lk 3:8; Mt 3:8. For this <span class="greek">ἄ</span>.<span class="greek"> τῆς μετανοίας ἔργα</span> Ac 26:20.” Note how Paul preached the gospel offer and the issue of response together, side by side.</p></p>
<p id="n4402663"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402663">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the temple.” This is actually a reference to the courts surrounding the temple proper, and has been translated accordingly.</p></p>
<p id="n4402664"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402664">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So experiencing…I stand.” The participle <span class="greek">τυχών</span> (<span class="translit">tuchōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402665"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402665">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 311 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐκτός</span> 3.b, “functions as prep. w. gen. <span class="greek">οὐδὲν ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> ὧν</span> <i>nothing except what</i> (cf. 1 Ch 29:3; 2 Ch 17:19; TestNapht. 6:2) Ac 26:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402666"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402666">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>What the prophets and Moses said</i>. Paul argued that his message reflected the hope of the Jewish scriptures.</p></p>
<p id="n4402667"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402667">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 277-78 s.v. <span class="greek">εἰ</span> 2 has “marker of an indirect question as content, <i>that</i>…Sim. also (Procop. Soph., Ep. 123 <span class="greek">χάριν ἔχειν εἰ</span> = that) <span class="greek">μαρτυρόμενος</span>…<span class="greek">εἰ παθητὸς ὁ Χριστός</span> <i>testifying</i>…<i>that the Christ was to suffer</i>…Ac 26:23.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402668"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402668">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:31.</p></p>
<p id="n4402669"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402669">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, to the Jewish people. <i>Grk</i> “the people”; the word “our” has been supplied to clarify the meaning.</p></p>
<p id="n4402670"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402670">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note how the context of Paul’s gospel message about Jesus, resurrection, and <i>light both to</i> Jews <i>and to the Gentiles</i> is rooted in the prophetic message of the OT scriptures. Paul was guilty of following God’s call and preaching the scriptural hope.</p></p>
<p id="n4402671"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402671">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402672"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402672">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402673"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402673">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term translated “lost your mind” see BDAG 610 s.v. <span class="greek">μαίνομαι</span>, which has “<i>you’re out of your mind</i>, <i>you’re raving</i>, said to one whose enthusiasm seems to have outrun better judgment 26:24.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>“You have lost your mind”</i> would be said to someone who speaks incredible things, in the opinion of the hearer. Paul’s mention of the resurrection (v. 23) was probably what prompted Festus to say this.</p></p>
<p id="n4402674"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402674">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402675"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402675">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402676"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402676">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “declaring.” BDAG 125 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀποφθέγγομαι</span> states, “<i>speak out, declare</i> boldly or loudly…<span class="greek">τὶ</span>: <span class="greek">σωφροσύνης ῥήματα</span> Ac 26:25.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402677"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402677">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 987 s.v. <span class="greek">σωφροσύνη</span> 1 has “gener. soundness of mind, <i>reasonableness, rationality</i>…<span class="greek">ἀληθείας καὶ σωφροσύνης ῥήματα</span> <i>true and rational words</i> (opp. <span class="greek">μαίνομαι</span>) Ac 26:25.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402678"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402678">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 782 s.v. <span class="greek">παρρησιάζομαι</span> 1 states, “<i>speak freely, openly, fearlessly</i>…likew. in the ptc. w. a verb of saying foll.…<span class="greek">παρρησιασάμενοι εἶπαν</span> 13:46.—26:26.” This could refer to boldness in speaking here.</p></p>
<p id="n4402679"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402679">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to whom I am speaking freely.” The relative pronoun (“whom”) was replaced by the personal pronoun (“him”) to simplify the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n4402680"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402680">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I cannot convince myself.” BDAG 792 s.v. <span class="greek">πείθω</span> 3.a states, “<span class="greek">οὐ πείθομαι</span> w. acc. and inf. <i>I cannot believe</i> Ac 26:26” (see also BDAG 586 s.v. <span class="greek">λανθάνω</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402681"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402681">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 586 s.v. <span class="greek">λανθάνω</span> states, “<span class="greek">λανθάνειν αὐτὸν τούτων οὐ πείθομαι οὐθέν</span> <i>I cannot bring myself to believe that any of these things has escaped his notice</i> Ac 26:26.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402682"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402682">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term refers to a hidden corner (BDAG 209 s.v. <span class="greek">γωνία</span>). Paul’s point is that these events to which he refers were not done in a secret, hidden place, tucked away outside of view. They were done in public for all the world to see.</p></p>
<p id="n4402683"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402683">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>“Do you believe the prophets?”</i> Note how Paul made the issue believing the OT prophets and God’s promise which God fulfilled in Christ. He was pushing King Agrippa toward a decision not for or against Paul’s guilt of any crime, but concerning Paul’s message.</p></p>
<p id="n4402684"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402684">84</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>King Agrippa</i> in 25:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4402685"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402685">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>King Agrippa</i> in 25:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4402686"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402686">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “In a short time you will make me a Christian.” On the difficulty of the precise nuances of Agrippa’s reply in this passage, see BDAG 791 s.v. <span class="greek">πείθω</span> 1.b. The point is that Paul was trying to persuade Agrippa to accept his message. If Agrippa had let Paul persuade him, he would have converted to Christianity.</p><p><b>sn</b> The question “<i>In such a short time are you persuading me to become a Christian?</i>” was probably a ploy on Agrippa’s part to deflect Paul from his call for a decision. Note also how the tables have turned: Agrippa was brought in to hear Paul’s defense, and now ends up defending himself. The questioner is now being questioned.</p></p>
<p id="n4402687"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402687">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 703 s.v. <span class="greek">ὀλίγος</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">β</span> has “<span class="greek">καὶ ἐν ὀλ</span>.<span class="greek"> καὶ ἐν μεγάλῳ</span> <i>whether in a short or a long time</i> vs. 29 (cf. B-D-F §195; GWhitaker, The Words of Agrippa to St. Paul: JTS 15, 1914, 82f; AFridrichsen, SymbOsl 14, ’35, 50; Field, Notes 141-43; s. Rob. 653).”</p></p>
<p id="n4402688"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402688">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Except for these chains</i>. The chains represented Paul’s unjust suffering for the sake of the message. His point was, in effect, “I do not care how long it takes. I only hope you and everyone else hearing this would become believers in Christ, but without my unjust suffering.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402689"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402689">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they spoke to one another saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402690"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402690">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 93 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄξιος</span> 1.b has “<span class="greek">θανάτου ἢ δεσμῶν ἄ</span>. <i>nothing deserving death or imprisonment</i> 23:29; 26:31.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Not doing anything deserving death…</i> Here is yet another declaration of Paul’s innocence, but still no release. The portrayal shows how unjust Paul’s confinement was.</p></p>
<p id="n4402691"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402691">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on King <i>Agrippa</i> in 25:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4402692"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402692">92</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on Porcius <i>Festus</i> in 24:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4402693"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402693">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “set free.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402694"><a href="file1088.xhtml#n4402694">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the emperor” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>If he had not appealed to Caesar</i>. Ultimately Agrippa and Festus blamed what Paul himself had done in appealing to Caesar for his own continued custody. In terms of Luke’s narrative, this still appears unjust and a denial of responsibility.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
