<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Corinthians 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Corinthians<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Apostles’ Ministry</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> One<sup><a id="n460041" href="file1112_notes.xhtml#n460041">1</a></sup> should think about us this way—as servants of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God. <span class="verse">4:2</span> Now what is sought in stewards is that one be found faithful. <span class="verse">4:3</span> So for me, it is a minor matter that I am judged by you or by any human court. In fact, I do not even judge myself. <span class="verse">4:4</span> For I am not aware of anything against myself, but I am not acquitted because of this. The one who judges me is the Lord. <span class="verse">4:5</span> So then, do not judge anything before the time. Wait until the Lord comes. He will<sup><a id="n460042" href="file1112_notes.xhtml#n460042">2</a></sup> bring to light the hidden things of darkness and reveal the motives of hearts. Then each will receive recognition<sup><a id="n460043" href="file1112_notes.xhtml#n460043">3</a></sup> from God. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:6</span> I have applied these things to myself and Apollos because of you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n460044" href="file1112_notes.xhtml#n460044">4</a></sup> so that through us you may learn “not to go beyond what is written,” so that none of you will be puffed up in favor of the one against the other. <span class="verse">4:7</span> For who concedes you any superiority? What do you have that you did not receive? And if you received it, why do you boast as though you did not? <span class="verse">4:8</span> Already you are satisfied! Already you are rich! You have become kings without us! I wish you had become kings so that we could reign with you! <span class="verse">4:9</span> For, I think, God has exhibited us apostles last of all, as men condemned to die, because we have become a spectacle to the world, both to angels and to people. <span class="verse">4:10</span> We are fools for Christ, but you are wise in Christ! We are weak, but you are strong! You are distinguished, we are dishonored! <span class="verse">4:11</span> To the present hour we are hungry and thirsty, poorly clothed, brutally treated, and without a roof over our heads. <span class="verse">4:12</span> We do hard work, toiling with our own hands. When we are verbally abused, we respond with a blessing, when persecuted, we endure, <span class="verse">4:13</span> when people lie about us, we answer in a friendly manner. We are the world’s dirt and scum, even now. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Father’s Warning</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:14</span> I am not writing these things to shame you, but to correct you as my dear children. <span class="verse">4:15</span> For though you may have 10,000 guardians in Christ, you do not have many fathers, because I became your father in Christ Jesus through the gospel. <span class="verse">4:16</span> I encourage you, then, be imitators of me. <span class="verse">4:17</span> For this reason, I have sent Timothy to you, who is my dear and faithful son in the Lord. He will remind you of my ways in Christ,<sup><a id="n460045" href="file1112_notes.xhtml#n460045">5</a></sup> as I teach them everywhere in every church. <span class="verse">4:18</span> Some have become arrogant,<sup><a id="n460046" href="file1112_notes.xhtml#n460046">6</a></sup> as if I were not coming to you. <span class="verse">4:19</span> But I will come to you soon, if the Lord is willing, and I will find out not only the talk of these arrogant people, but also their power. <span class="verse">4:20</span> For the kingdom of God is demonstrated not in idle talk but with power. <span class="verse">4:21</span> What do you want? Shall I come to you with a rod of discipline<sup><a id="n460047" href="file1112_notes.xhtml#n460047">7</a></sup> or with love and a spirit of gentleness? </p>

</body>
</html>