<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Corinthians 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Corinthians<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Self-Purification</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> Therefore, since we have these promises, dear friends, let us cleanse ourselves<sup><a id="n470071" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n470071">1</a></sup> from everything that could defile the body<sup><a id="n470072" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n470072">2</a></sup> and the spirit, and thus accomplish<sup><a id="n470073" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n470073">3</a></sup> holiness out of reverence for God.<sup><a id="n470074" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n470074">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:2</span> Make room for us in your hearts;<sup><a id="n470075" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n470075">5</a></sup> we have wronged no one, we have ruined no one,<sup><a id="n470076" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n470076">6</a></sup> we have exploited no one.<sup><a id="n470077" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n470077">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:3</span> I do not say this to condemn you, for I told you before<sup><a id="n470078" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n470078">8</a></sup> that you are in our hearts so that we die together and live together with you.<sup><a id="n470079" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n470079">9</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Letter That Caused Sadness</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:4</span> I have great confidence in you; I take great pride<sup><a id="n4700710" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700710">10</a></sup> on your behalf. I am filled with encouragement;<sup><a id="n4700711" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700711">11</a></sup> I am overflowing with joy in the midst of<sup><a id="n4700712" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700712">12</a></sup> all our suffering. <span class="verse">7:5</span> For even when we came into Macedonia, our body<sup><a id="n4700713" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700713">13</a></sup> had no rest at all, but we were troubled in every way—struggles from the outside, fears from within. <span class="verse">7:6</span> But God, who encourages<sup><a id="n4700714" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700714">14</a></sup> the downhearted, encouraged<sup><a id="n4700715" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700715">15</a></sup> us by the arrival of Titus. <span class="verse">7:7</span> We were encouraged<sup><a id="n4700716" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700716">16</a></sup> not only by his arrival, but also by the encouragement<sup><a id="n4700717" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700717">17</a></sup> you gave<sup><a id="n4700718" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700718">18</a></sup> him, as he reported to us your longing, your mourning,<sup><a id="n4700719" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700719">19</a></sup> your deep concern<sup><a id="n4700720" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700720">20</a></sup> for me, so that I rejoiced more than ever. <span class="verse">7:8</span> For even if I made you sad<sup><a id="n4700721" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700721">21</a></sup> by my letter,<sup><a id="n4700722" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700722">22</a></sup> I do not regret having written it<sup><a id="n4700723" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700723">23</a></sup> (even though I did regret it,<sup><a id="n4700724" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700724">24</a></sup> for<sup><a id="n4700725" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700725">25</a></sup> I see that my letter made you sad,<sup><a id="n4700726" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700726">26</a></sup> though only for a short time). <span class="verse">7:9</span> Now I rejoice, not because you were made sad,<sup><a id="n4700727" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700727">27</a></sup> but because you were made sad to the point of repentance. For you were made sad as God intended,<sup><a id="n4700728" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700728">28</a></sup> so that you were not harmed<sup><a id="n4700729" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700729">29</a></sup> in any way by us. <span class="verse">7:10</span> For sadness as intended by God produces a repentance that leads to salvation, leaving no regret, but worldly sadness brings about death. <span class="verse">7:11</span> For see what this very thing, this sadness<sup><a id="n4700730" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700730">30</a></sup> as God intended, has produced in you: what eagerness, what defense of yourselves,<sup><a id="n4700731" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700731">31</a></sup> what indignation,<sup><a id="n4700732" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700732">32</a></sup> what alarm, what longing, what deep concern,<sup><a id="n4700733" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700733">33</a></sup> what punishment!<sup><a id="n4700734" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700734">34</a></sup> In everything you have proved yourselves to be innocent in this matter. <span class="verse">7:12</span> So then, even though I wrote to you, it was not on account of the one who did wrong, or on account of the one who was wronged, but to reveal to you your eagerness on our behalf<sup><a id="n4700735" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700735">35</a></sup> before God. <span class="verse">7:13</span> Therefore we have been encouraged. And in addition to our own encouragement, we rejoiced even more at the joy of Titus, because all of you have refreshed his spirit.<sup><a id="n4700736" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700736">36</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:14</span> For if I have boasted to him about anything concerning you, I have not been embarrassed by you,<sup><a id="n4700737" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700737">37</a></sup> but just as everything we said to you was true,<sup><a id="n4700738" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700738">38</a></sup> so our boasting to Titus about you<sup><a id="n4700739" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700739">39</a></sup> has proved true as well. <span class="verse">7:15</span> And his affection for you is much greater<sup><a id="n4700740" href="file1132_notes.xhtml#n4700740">40</a></sup> when he remembers the obedience of you all, how you welcomed him with fear and trembling. <span class="verse">7:16</span> I rejoice because in everything I am fully confident in you. </p>

</body>
</html>