<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 1</h2>
<p id="n440011"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n440011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “produced,” <i>Grk</i> “made.”</p></p>
<p id="n440012"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n440012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “first.” The translation “former” is preferred because “first” could imply to the modern English reader that the author means that his previous account was the first one to be written down. The Greek term <span class="greek">πρῶτος</span> (<span class="translit">prōtos</span>) does not necessarily mean “first” in an absolute sense, but can refer to the first in a set or series. That is what is intended here—the first account (known as the Gospel of Luke) as compared to the second one (known as Acts).</p></p>
<p id="n440013"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n440013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">λόγος</span> (<span class="translit">logos</span>) is sometimes translated “book” (NRSV, NIV) or “treatise” (KJV). A formal, systematic treatment of a subject is implied, but the word “book” may be too specific and slightly misleading to the modern reader, so “account” has been used.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The former account</i> refers to the Gospel of Luke, which was “volume one” of the two-volume work Luke-Acts.</p></p>
<p id="n440014"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n440014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O Theophilus,” but the usage of the vocative in Acts with <span class="greek">ὦ</span> (<span class="translit">ō</span>) is unemphatic, following more the classical idiom (see <i>ExSyn</i> 69).</p></p>
<p id="n440015"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n440015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to heaven” are not in the Greek text, but are supplied from v. 11. Several modern translations (NIV, NRSV) supply the words “to heaven” after “taken up” to specify the destination explicitly mentioned later in 1:11.</p></p>
<p id="n440016"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n440016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “commands.” Although some modern translations render <span class="greek">ἐντειλάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">enteilamenos</span>) as “instructions” (NIV, NRSV), the word implies authority or official sanction (G. Schrenk, <i>TDNT</i> 2:545), so that a word like “orders” conveys the idea more effectively. The action of the temporal participle is antecedent (prior) to the action of the verb it modifies (“taken up”).</p></p>
<p id="n440017"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n440017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “through.”</p></p>
<p id="n440018"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n440018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to them”; the referent (the apostles) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n440019"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n440019">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>After his suffering</i> is a reference to Jesus’ crucifixion and the abuse which preceded it.</p></p>
<p id="n4400110"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “during forty days.” The phrase “over a forty-day period” is used rather than “during forty days” because (as the other NT accounts of Jesus’ appearances make clear) Jesus was not continually visible to the apostles during the forty days, but appeared to them on various occasions.</p></p>
<p id="n4400111"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400111">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n4400112"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “While he was assembling with them,” or “while he was sharing a meal with them.” There are three basic options for translating the verb <span class="greek">συναλίζω</span> (<span class="translit">sunalizō</span>): (1) “Eat (salt) with, share a meal with”; (2) “bring together, assemble”; (3) “spend the night with, stay with” (see BDAG 964 s.v.). The difficulty with the first option is that it does not fit the context, and this meaning is not found elsewhere. The second option is difficult because of the singular number and the present tense. The third option is based on a spelling variation of <span class="greek">συναυλιζόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">sunaulizomenos</span>), which some minuscules actually read here. The difference in meaning between (2) and (3) is not great, but (3) seems to fit the context somewhat better here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400113"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ordered them”; the command “Do not leave” is not in Greek but is an indirect quotation in the original (see note at end of the verse for explanation).</p></p>
<p id="n4400115"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “there” is not in the Greek text (direct objects in Greek were frequently omitted when clear from the context).</p></p>
<p id="n4400116"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the,” with the article used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n4400117"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the promise of the Father.” Jesus is referring to the promised gift of the Holy Spirit (see the following verse).</p></p>
<p id="n4400118"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “While he was with them, he ordered them not to leave Jerusalem, but to wait there for ‘what my Father promised, which you heard about from me.’” This verse moves from indirect to direct discourse. This abrupt change is very awkward, so the entire quotation has been rendered as direct discourse in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400119"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> In the Greek text v. 5 is a continuation of the previous sentence, which is long and complicated. In keeping with the tendency of contemporary English to use shorter sentences, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400120"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The pronoun is plural in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n4400121"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they began to ask him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. The imperfect tense of the Greek verb <span class="greek">ἠρώτων</span> (<span class="translit">ērōtōn</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4400122"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It is not for you to know.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400123"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the ends.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400124"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400125"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And as.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400126"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400127"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “here” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4400128"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400128">28</a> <p><b>tc</b> Codex Bezae (D) and several other witnesses lack the words <span class="greek">εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν</span> (<span class="translit">eis ton ouranon</span>, “into heaven”) here, most likely by way of accidental deletion. In any event, it is hardly correct to suppose that the Western text has intentionally suppressed references to the ascension of Christ here, for the phrase is solidly attested in the final clause of the verse.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “into the sky.” The Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) may be translated “sky” (vv. 10, 11a) or “heaven” (twice in v. 11b) depending on the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4400130"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from the hill.” The Greek term <span class="greek">ὄρος</span> (<span class="translit">oros</span>) refers to a relatively high elevation of land in contrast with <span class="greek">βουνός</span> (<span class="translit">bounos</span>, “hill”).</p></p>
<p id="n4400131"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400131">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>Mount of Olives</i> is the traditional name for this mountain, also called Olivet. The Mount of Olives is really a ridge running north to south about 1.8 mi (3 km) long, east of Jerusalem across the Kidron Valley. Its central elevation is about 100 ft (30 m) higher than Jerusalem. It was named for the large number of olive trees which grew on it.</p></p>
<p id="n4400132"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400132">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>a Sabbath day’s journey</i> refers to the distance the rabbis permitted a person to travel on the Sabbath without breaking the Sabbath, specified in tractate <i>Sotah</i> 5:3 of the Mishnah as 2,000 cubits (a cubit was about 18 inches). In this case the distance was about half a mile (1 km).</p></p>
<p id="n4400133"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400134"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “Jerusalem” is not in the Greek text but is implied (direct objects were often omitted when clear from the context).</p></p>
<p id="n4400135"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400135">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> In the various lists of the twelve, <i>Peter</i> (also called Simon) is always mentioned first (see also Matt 10:1-4; Mark 3:16-19; Luke 6:13-16) and the first four are always the same, though not in the same order after Peter.</p></p>
<p id="n4400136"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “were there” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4400137"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400137">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ <i>brothers</i> are mentioned in Matt 13:55 and John 7:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4400138"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And in those days.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400139"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400139">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “brethren” (but the term includes both male and female believers present in this gathering, as indicated by those named in vv. 13-14).</p></p>
<p id="n4400140"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Men brothers.” In light of the compound phrase <span class="greek">ἄνδρες ἀδελφοί</span> (<span class="translit">andres adelphoi</span>, “Men brothers”) Peter’s words are best understood as directly addressed to the males present, possibly referring specifically to the twelve (really ten at this point—eleven minus the speaker, Peter) mentioned by name in v. 13.</p></p>
<p id="n4400141"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “foretold by the mouth of.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400142"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and was chosen to have a share in this ministry.” The term <span class="greek">λαγχάνω</span> (<span class="translit">lanchanō</span>) here and in 2 Pet 1:1 can be understood as referring to the process of divine choice and thus be translated, “was chosen to have.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400143"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The referent of “this man” (Judas) was specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400144"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “with the reward of his wickedness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400145"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “falling headlong.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400146"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “all his bowels.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400147"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And this.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400148"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400148">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Their own language</i> refers to Aramaic, the primary language spoken in Palestine in Jesus’ day.</p></p>
<p id="n4400149"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that field was called.” The passive voice has been converted to active in the translation in keeping with contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400150"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “uninhabited” or “empty.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400151"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400151">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 69:25.</p></p>
<p id="n4400152"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400152">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Let another take his office.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 109:8.</p></p>
<p id="n4400153"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400153">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which only exceptionally is used in a generic sense of both males and females. In this context, where a successor to Judas is being chosen, only men were under consideration in the original historical context.</p></p>
<p id="n4400154"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400154">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Lord Jesus went in and out among us.” According to BDAG 294 s.v. <span class="greek">εἰσέρχομαι</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">β</span>, “<span class="greek">ἐν παντὶ χρόνῳ ᾧ εἰσῆλθεν καὶ ἐξῆλθεν ἐφ᾿ ἡμᾶς</span> <i>went in and out among us</i> = <i>associated with us</i> Ac 1:21.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400155"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400155">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the pronoun “he” refers to Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4400156"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400156">56</a> <p><b>tc</b> Codex Bezae (D) and other Western witnesses have “he proposed,” referring to Peter, thus emphasizing his role above the other apostles. The Western text displays a conscious pattern of elevating Peter in Acts, and thus the singular verb here is a palpably motivated reading.</p></p>
<p id="n4400157"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400157">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So they proposed two.” The word “candidates” was supplied in the text for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400158"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400158">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And praying, they said.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400159"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400159">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to take the place.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400160"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400160">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of this ministry.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400161"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400161">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the task of this service and apostleship which Judas ceased to perform.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400162"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400162">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To go to his own place</i>. This may well be a euphemism for Judas’ judged fate. He separated himself from them, and thus separated he would remain.</p></p>
<p id="n4400163"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400163">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the continuity with the preceding verse. Greek style often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” but English style does not.</p></p>
<p id="n4400164"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400164">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and the lot fell on Matthias.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400165"><a href="file1063.xhtml#n4400165">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “he was counted as one of the apostles along with the eleven.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
