<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n600051"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n600051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “shepherd,” “tend,” “pastor.”</p></p>
<p id="n600052"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n600052">2</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few significant and early witnesses <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B sa) lack <span class="greek">ἐπισκοποῦντες</span> (<span class="translit">episkopountes</span>, “exercising oversight”), but the participle enjoys otherwise good ms support (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat bo). A decision is difficult because normally the shorter reading is preferred, especially when found in excellent witnesses. However, in this instance the omission may be due to a hesitation among some scribes to associate oversight with elders, since the later church viewed overseer/bishop as a separate office from elder.</p></p>
<p id="n600053"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n600053">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “not under compulsion/coercion.”</p></p>
<p id="n600054"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n600054">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to God.”</p></p>
<p id="n600055"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n600055">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not as lording it over…but being examples.” The participles continue the command of v. 2 by describing how the shepherding should be carried out.</p></p>
<p id="n600056"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n600056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ones allotted,” referring to those God has given over to their care.</p></p>
<p id="n600057"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n600057">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then” to reflect the logical sequence of events.</p></p>
<p id="n600058"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n600058">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> In this context <i>younger</i> and <i>elder</i> are terms that combine two meanings: relative age and an official structure of leadership in the church. As in v. 1, <i>elder</i> here denotes those who exercise spiritual leadership, who for the most part are older in years. Likewise <i>younger</i> means the rest of the community, who for the most part are younger in age, who are urged to accept the authority of their leaders.</p></p>
<p id="n600059"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n600059">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Prov 3:34 (cf. Jas 4:6).</p></p>
<p id="n6000510"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in time,” but connoting “the proper time, when the time is right” as in Matt 24:45; Luke 12:42.</p></p>
<p id="n6000511"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, so that in due time he may exalt you.” The sentence was rearranged so that the English reader could more clearly see the connection between “casting” (v. 7) and “humble” (v. 6).</p></p>
<p id="n6000512"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “throwing on”; “loading.” Some scholars take the participle to function imperativally, or as attendant circumstance—thus, “cast.” See below for discussion.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Casting</i>. According to <i>ExSyn</i> 630, “Although treated as an independent command in several modern translations (e.g., RSV, NRSV, NIV), the participle [<i>casting</i>] should be connected with the verb of v 6, <span class="greek">ταπεινώθητε</span> [<span class="translit">tapeinōthēte</span>, <i>Humble yourselves</i>]. As such, it is not offering a new command, but is defining <i>how</i> believers are to humble themselves. Taking the participle as means enriches the understanding of both verbs: Humbling oneself is not a negative act of self-denial per se, but a positive one of active dependence on God for help.” </p></p>
<p id="n6000513"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “anxiety, burden,” but using a word from the same root as the verb “cares” in the last part of the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n6000514"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000514">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> This phrase may be an allusion to Ps 22:13.</p></p>
<p id="n6000515"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000515">15</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175) lack the pronoun <span class="greek">τινα</span> (<span class="translit">tina</span>), while others have it. Those that have it either put the acute accent over the penult, making this an interrogative pronoun (“whom”; 436 642 2492 vg; most Fathers), or leave off any accent, making this an indefinite pronoun (“someone”; L P 33<sup>vid</sup> 81 1611 1735 1739 2344 <i>al</i>), or are too early to employ accents but nevertheless have the pronoun <span class="greek">τινα</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A). Generally speaking, the shorter and harder reading is to be preferred. In this instance, the omission of the pronoun would obviously be accommodated for by scribes, since both <span class="greek">ζητέω</span> (<span class="translit">zēteō</span>, “look, seek”) and <span class="greek">καταπίνω</span> (<span class="translit">katapinō</span>, “devour”) are transitive verbs. However, if the omission were original, one might expect the position of the pronoun to float in the <span class="smcaps">mss</span>—both before and after the infinitive <span class="greek">καταπιεῖν</span> (<span class="translit">katapiein</span>, “to devour”). Further, other terms might be expected as well, such as <span class="greek">ἕνα ἐξ ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">hena ex humōn</span>, “one of you”) or <span class="greek">τινα ἐξ ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">tina ex humōn</span>, “a certain one/someone of you”). The uniformity of both the word and its location suggests that the shorter reading (found in but a few Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span>) in this instance was a scribal mistake. As to whether the pronoun is interrogative or indefinite, since accents were not a part of the earliest <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, such Greek witnesses are of no help to us in this kind of problem. There would be little difference in meaning between the two in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6000516"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whom,” referring to the devil in v. 8. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000517"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing,” a participle that usually denotes a reason for the related action.</p></p>
<p id="n6000518"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “your brotherhood.” The Greek term “brotherhood” is used in a broad sense to connote familial relationships within the family of God (cf. BDAG 19 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφότης</span> 1). Another alternative translation would be “your fellow believers,” though this would weaken the familial connotations. This same word occurs in 2:17; there it has been translated “family of believers.” </p></p>
<p id="n6000519"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “your brotherhood in the world,” referring to the Christian community worldwide.</p></p>
<p id="n6000520"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb carries the nuance “to accomplish, complete,” emphasizing their faithful endurance in suffering. The verb is passive in Greek (“suffering is being endured by your brotherhood”), but has been translated as an active to give a smoother English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6000521"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the same things of sufferings.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000522"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000522">22</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B 614 630 1505 1611) lack “Jesus” after “Christ,” while the majority include the name (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> A P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 5 33 81 436 442 1175 1735 1739 1852 2344 2492 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt). The inclusion is a natural and predictable expansion on the text, but in light of its broad representation a decision is difficult. NA<sup>28</sup> lists the longer reading in the apparatus with a diamond, indicating a toss-up as to what the initial text should read.</p></p>
<p id="n6000523"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The pronoun “you” is not used explicitly but is clearly implied by the Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n6000524"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> No verb is expressed here but the verb “is” or “belongs” is clearly implied. This doxology expresses a fact for which God should be glorified (as in 4:11), rather than a wish or prayer (“may power be to him”).</p></p>
<p id="n6000525"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000525">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>Through Silvanus</i> means either that Silvanus was the secretary (amanuensis) who assisted Peter in writing or composing the letter (cf. Rom 16:22) or that he carried the letter to the churches. The latter sense is more likely since this is the meaning of the Greek wording when it is used elsewhere (cf. Acts 15:23; Ignatius, <i>Letter to the Romans</i> 10:1; <i>Letter to the Philadelphians</i> 11:2; <i>Letter to the Smyrnaeans</i> 12:1; Polycarp, <i>Letter to the Philippians</i> 14), though it is perhaps possible that both ideas could be incorporated by this expression. For a detailed argument regarding this issue, see E. R. Richards, “Silvanus Was Not Peter’s Secretary: Theological Bias in Interpreting <span class="greek">διὰ Σιλουανοῦ</span>…<span class="greek">ἔγραψα</span>,” <i>JETS</i> 43 (September 2000): 417-32.</p></p>
<p id="n6000526"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the faithful brother, as I think.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000527"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> These are participles (“encouraging and testifying”) showing purpose. The pronoun object “you” is omitted in Greek but implied by the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6000528"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which stand fast.” For emphasis, and due to constraints of contemporary English, this was made a separate sentence in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000529"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one in Babylon,” which could refer to some individual woman (“she who is in Babylon”) since the Greek article (here “the one”) is feminine. But it is much more likely to be a veiled reference to a church (the Greek word “church” is also feminine in gender).</p></p>
<p id="n6000530"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000530">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> Most scholars understand <i>Babylon</i> here to be a figurative reference to Rome. Although in the OT the city of Babylon in Mesopotamia was the seat of tremendous power (2 Kgs 24-25; Isa 39; Jer 25), by the time of the NT what was left was an insignificant town, and there is no tradition in Christian history that Peter ever visited there. On the other hand, Christian tradition connects Peter with the church in Rome, and many interpreters think other references to Babylon in the NT refer to Rome as well (Rev 14:8; 16:19; 17:5; 18:2, 10, 21). Thus it is likely Peter was referring to Rome here.</p></p>
<p id="n6000531"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000531">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “chosen together,” implying the connection “with you” in context.</p></p>
<p id="n6000532"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a kiss of love.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000533"><a href="file1216.xhtml#n6000533">33</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> P 5 436 442 1611 1735 1739<sup>c</sup> 1852 2492 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy) have <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amen</span>, “amen”) at the end of 1 Peter. Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Further, the absence of such a conclusion to the epistle in such witnesses as <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> A B <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 81 323 945 1175 1241 1243 1739* 2344 co seems inexplicable unless the word is not authentic.</p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
