<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Timothy 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Timothy<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Qualifications for Overseers and Deacons</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> This saying<sup><a id="n540031" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n540031">1</a></sup> is trustworthy: “If someone aspires to the office of overseer,<sup><a id="n540032" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n540032">2</a></sup> he desires a good work.” <span class="verse">3:2</span> The overseer<sup><a id="n540033" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n540033">3</a></sup> then must be above reproach, the husband of one wife,<sup><a id="n540034" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n540034">4</a></sup> temperate, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, an able teacher, <span class="verse">3:3</span> not a drunkard, not violent, but gentle, not contentious, free from the love of money. <span class="verse">3:4</span> He must manage his own household well and keep his children in control without losing his dignity.<sup><a id="n540035" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n540035">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:5</span> But if someone does not know how to manage his own household, how will he care for the church of God? <span class="verse">3:6</span> He must not be a recent convert or he may become arrogant<sup><a id="n540036" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n540036">6</a></sup> and fall into the punishment that the devil will exact.<sup><a id="n540037" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n540037">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:7</span> And he must be well thought of by<sup><a id="n540038" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n540038">8</a></sup> those outside the faith,<sup><a id="n540039" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n540039">9</a></sup> so that he may not fall into disgrace and be caught by the devil’s trap.<sup><a id="n5400310" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400310">10</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:8</span> Deacons likewise must be dignified,<sup><a id="n5400311" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400311">11</a></sup> not two-faced,<sup><a id="n5400312" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400312">12</a></sup> not given to excessive drinking,<sup><a id="n5400313" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400313">13</a></sup> not greedy for gain, <span class="verse">3:9</span> holding to the mystery of the faith<sup><a id="n5400314" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400314">14</a></sup> with a clear conscience. <span class="verse">3:10</span> And these also must be tested first and then let them serve as deacons if they are found blameless. <span class="verse">3:11</span> Likewise also their wives<sup><a id="n5400315" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400315">15</a></sup> must be dignified, not slanderous, temperate, faithful in every respect. <span class="verse">3:12</span> Deacons must be husbands of one wife<sup><a id="n5400316" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400316">16</a></sup> and good managers of their children and their own households. <span class="verse">3:13</span> For those who have served well as deacons gain a good standing for themselves<sup><a id="n5400317" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400317">17</a></sup> and great boldness in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.<sup><a id="n5400318" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400318">18</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Conduct in God’s Church</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:14</span> I hope to come to you soon, but I am writing these instructions<sup><a id="n5400319" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400319">19</a></sup> to you <span class="verse">3:15</span> in case I am delayed, to let you know how people ought to conduct themselves<sup><a id="n5400320" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400320">20</a></sup> in the household of God, because it is<sup><a id="n5400321" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400321">21</a></sup> the church of the living God, the support and bulwark of the truth. <span class="verse">3:16</span> And we all agree,<sup><a id="n5400322" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400322">22</a></sup> our religion contains amazing revelation:<sup><a id="n5400323" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400323">23</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">He<sup><a id="n5400324" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400324">24</a></sup> was revealed in the flesh,</p>
<p class="poetry">vindicated by the Spirit,<sup><a id="n5400325" href="file1176_notes.xhtml#n5400325">25</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry">seen by angels,</p>
<p class="poetry">proclaimed among Gentiles,</p>
<p class="poetry">believed on in the world,</p>
<p class="poetry">taken up in glory. </p>

</body>
</html>