<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 16</h2>
<p id="n420161"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n420161">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n420162"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n420162">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> These are not formal legal charges, but reports from friends, acquaintances, etc.; <i>Grk</i> “A certain man was rich who had a manager, and this one was reported to him as wasting his property.”</p></p>
<p id="n420163"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n420163">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>His manager</i> was the steward in charge of managing the house. He could have been a slave trained for the role.</p></p>
<p id="n420164"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n420164">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “squandering.” This verb is graphic; it means to scatter (L&amp;N 57.151).</p></p>
<p id="n420165"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n420165">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the result of the reports the man received about his manager.</p></p>
<p id="n420166"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n420166">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (the manager) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n420167"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n420167">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> Although phrased as a question, the charges were believed by the owner, as his dismissal of the manager implies.</p></p>
<p id="n420168"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n420168">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “stewardship”; the Greek word <span class="greek">οἰκονομία</span> (<span class="translit">oikonomia</span>) is cognate with the noun for the manager (<span class="greek">οἰκονόμος</span>, <span class="translit">oikonomos</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n420169"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n420169">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events in the parable.</p></p>
<p id="n4201610"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the stewardship,” “the management.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201611"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here “dig” could refer (1) to excavation (“dig ditches,” L&amp;N 19.55) or (2) to agricultural labor (“work the soil,” L&amp;N 43.3). In either case this was labor performed by the uneducated, so it would be an insult as a job for a manager.</p></p>
<p id="n4201612"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I do not have strength to dig; I am ashamed to beg.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>To beg</i> would represent a real lowering of status for the manager, because many of those whom he had formerly collected debts from, he would now be forced to beg from.</p></p>
<p id="n4201613"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a dramatic use of the aorist and the verse is left unconnected to the previous verse by asyndeton, giving the impression of a sudden realization.</p></p>
<p id="n4201614"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201614">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> Thinking ahead, the manager develops a plan to make people think kindly of him (<i>welcome me into their homes</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n4201615"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the result of the manager’s decision.</p></p>
<p id="n4201616"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “summoning.” The participle <span class="greek">προσκαλεσάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">proskalesamenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201617"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (the first debtor) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201618"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201618">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>measure</i> (sometimes translated “bath”) was just over 8 gallons (about 30 liters). This is a large debt—about 875 gallons (3000 liters) of olive oil, worth 1000 denarii, over three year’s pay for a daily worker.</p></p>
<p id="n4201619"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (the manager) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4201620"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201620">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> The bill was halved (<i>sit down quickly, and write fifty</i>). What was the steward doing? This is debated. 1) Did he simply lower the price? 2) Did he remove interest from the debt? 3) Did he remove his own commission? It is hard to be sure. Either of the latter two options is more likely. The goal was clear: The manager would be seen in a favorable light for bringing a deflationary trend to prices.</p></p>
<p id="n4201621"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (the second debtor) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4201622"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201622">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>100 measures</i> here was 100 cors. A cor was a Hebrew dry measure for grain, flour, etc., of between 10-12 bushels (about 390 liters). This was a huge amount of wheat, representing the yield of about 100 acres, a debt of between 2500-3000 denarii.</p></p>
<p id="n4201623"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201623">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (the manager) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201624"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201624">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> The percentage of reduction may not be as great because of the change in material.</p></p>
<p id="n4201625"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201625">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201626"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201626">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> Is the manager <i>dishonest</i> because of what he just did? Or is it a reference to what he had done earlier, described in v. 1? This is a difficult question, but it seems unlikely that the master, having fired the man for prior dishonesty, would now commend those same actions. It would also be unusual for Jesus to make that point of the story the example. Thus it is more likely the reference to dishonesty goes back to the earliest events, while the commendation is for the cleverness of the former manager reflected in vv. 5-7.</p></p>
<p id="n4201627"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201627">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> Where this parable ends is debated: Does it conclude with v. 7, after v. 8a, after v. 8b, or after v. 9? Verse 8a looks as if it is still part of the story, with its clear reference to the manager, while 8b looks like Jesus’ application, since its remarks are more general. So it is most likely the parable stops after v. 8a.</p></p>
<p id="n4201628"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201628">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sons” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4201629"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201629">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with their own generation.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201630"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sons.” Here the phrase “sons of light” is a reference to the righteous. The point is that those of the world often think ahead about consequences better than the righteous do.</p></p>
<p id="n4201631"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201631">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “unrighteous mammon.” <i>Mammon</i> is the Aramaic term for wealth or possessions. The point is not that money is inherently evil, but that it is often misused so that it is a means of evil; see 1 Tim 6:6-10, 17-19. The call is to be generous and kind in its use. Zacchaeus becomes the example of this in Luke’s Gospel (19:1-10).</p></p>
<p id="n4201632"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they may welcome you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201633"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201633">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “eternal tents” (as dwelling places).</p></p>
<p id="n4201634"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201634">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of the statement <i>faithful in a very little</i> is that character is shown in how little things are treated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201635"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201635">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faithful.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201636"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201636">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the unrighteous mammon.” See the note on the phrase “worldly wealth” in v. 9.</p></p>
<p id="n4201637"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201637">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Entrust you with the true riches</i> is a reference to future service for God. The idea is like 1 Cor 9:11, except there the imagery is reversed.</p></p>
<p id="n4201638"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201638">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faithful.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201639"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201639">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have not been faithful with what is another’s.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201640"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201640">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “what is your own.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201641"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201641">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> The contrast between <i>hate</i> and <i>love</i> here is rhetorical. The point is that one will choose the favorite if a choice has to be made.</p></p>
<p id="n4201642"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201642">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and treat [the other] with contempt.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201643"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201643">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God and mammon.” This is the same word (<span class="greek">μαμωνᾶς</span>, <span class="translit">mamōnas</span>; often merely transliterated as “mammon”) translated “worldly wealth” in vv. 9, 11.</p><p><b>sn</b> The term <i>money</i> is used to translate <i>mammon</i>, the Aramaic term for wealth or possessions. The point is not that money is inherently evil, but that it is often misused so that it is a means of evil; see 1 Tim 6:6-10, 17-19. Here “money” is personified as a potential master and thus competes with God for the loyalty of the disciple. The passage is ultimately not a condemnation of wealth (there is no call here for absolute poverty) but a call for unqualified discipleship. God must be first, not money or possessions.</p></p>
<p id="n4201644"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201644">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n4201645"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201645">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> A figurative extension of the literal meaning “to turn one’s nose up at someone”; here “ridicule, sneer at, show contempt for” (L&amp;N 33.409).</p></p>
<p id="n4201646"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201646">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201647"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201647">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201648"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201648">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “before men.” The contrast is between outward appearance (“in people’s eyes”) and inward reality (“God knows your hearts”). Here the Greek term <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used twice in a generic sense, referring to both men and women, but “men” has been retained in the text to provide a strong verbal contrast with “God” in the second half of the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4201649"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201649">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “exalted.” This refers to the pride that often comes with money and position.</p></p>
<p id="n4201650"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201650">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is an abomination,” “is abhorrent” (L&amp;N 25.187).</p></p>
<p id="n4201651"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201651">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is no verb in the Greek text; one must be supplied. Some translations (NASB, NIV) supply “proclaimed” based on the parallelism with the proclamation of the kingdom. The transitional nature of this verse, however, seems to call for something more like “in effect” (NRSV) or, as used here, “in force.” Further, Greek generally can omit one of two kinds of verbs—either the equative verb or one that is <i>already</i> mentioned in the preceding context (<i>ExSyn</i> 39).</p></p>
<p id="n4201652"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201652">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John</i> refers to John the Baptist.</p></p>
<p id="n4201653"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201653">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Until John; since then</i>. This verse indicates a shift in era, from law to kingdom.</p></p>
<p id="n4201654"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201654">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n4201655"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201655">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Many translations have “entereth violently into it” (ASV) or “is forcing his way into it” (NASB, NIV). This is not true of everyone. It is better to read the verb <span class="greek">βιάζεται</span> here as passive rather than middle, and in a softened sense of “be urged.” See Gen 33:11; Judg 13:15-16; 19:7; 2 Sam 3:25, 27 in the LXX. This fits the context well because it agrees with Jesus’ attempt to persuade his opponents to respond morally. For further discussion and details, see D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> (BECNT), 2:1352-53. For a summary of the lexical options see BDAG 175 s.v. <span class="greek">βιάζω</span>. Differences in the context suggest a different meaning for the same term in Matt 11:12.</p></p>
<p id="n4201656"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201656">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “one small part of a letter” (L&amp;N 33.37).</p></p>
<p id="n4201657"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201657">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to fall”; that is, “to drop out of the text.” Jesus’ point may be that the law is going to reach its goal without fail, in that the era of the promised kingdom comes.</p></p>
<p id="n4201658"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201658">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> The examples of marriage and divorce show that the ethical standards of the new era are still faithful to promises made in the presence of God. To contribute to the breakup of a marriage, which involved a vow before God, is to commit <i>adultery</i>. This works whether one gets a divorce or marries a person who is divorced, thus finalizing the breakup of the marriage. Jesus’ point concerns the need for fidelity and ethical integrity in the new era.</p></p>
<p id="n4201659"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201659">59</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Purple</i> describes a fine, expensive dye used on luxurious clothing, and by metonymy, refers to clothing colored with that dye. It pictures someone of great wealth.</p></p>
<p id="n4201660"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201660">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “celebrated with ostentation” (L&amp;N 88.255), that is, with showing off. Here was the original conspicuous consumer.</p></p>
<p id="n4201661"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201661">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> The passive verb <span class="greek">ἐβέβλητο</span> (<span class="translit">ebeblēto</span>) does not indicate how Lazarus got there. Cf. BDAG 163 s.v. <span class="greek">βάλλω</span> 1.b, “he lay before the door”; Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 9.10.2 (9.209).</p></p>
<p id="n4201662"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201662">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is the one time in all the gospels that a figure in a parable is mentioned by name. It will become important later in the account.</p></p>
<p id="n4201663"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201663">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was covered with ulcers.” The words “whose body” are implied in the context (L&amp;N 23.180).</p></p>
<p id="n4201664"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201664">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to eat his fill,” but this phrase has been simplified as “to eat” for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4201665"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201665">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">κύνες</span> (<span class="translit">kunes</span>) refers to “wild” dogs (either “street” dogs or watchdogs), not house pets (L&amp;N 4.34).</p></p>
<p id="n4201666"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201666">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> When <i>the dogs came and licked his sores</i> it meant that he was unclean. See the negative image of Rev 22:15 that draws on this picture.</p></p>
<p id="n4201667"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201667">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that the.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201668"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201668">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to Abraham’s bosom.” The phrase “carried by the angels to Abraham’s bosom” describes being gathered to the fathers and is a way to refer to heaven (Gen 15:15; 47:30; Deut 31:16).</p></p>
<p id="n4201669"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201669">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201670"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201670">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> The shorter description suggests a different fate, which is confirmed in the following verses.</p></p>
<p id="n4201671"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201671">71</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek term <i>Hades</i> stands for the Hebrew concept of <i>Sheol</i>. This is where the dead were gathered (Pss 16:10; 86:13). In the NT Hades sometimes has an additional negative force of awaiting judgment (Rev 20:13).</p></p>
<p id="n4201672"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201672">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> Hades is a place of <i>torment</i>, especially as one knows that he is separated from God.</p></p>
<p id="n4201673"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201673">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he lifted up his eyes” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4201674"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201674">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in his bosom,” the same phrase used in 16:22. This idiom refers to heaven and/or participation in the eschatological banquet. An appropriate modern equivalent is “at Abraham’s side.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201675"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201675">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous actions in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201676"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201676">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “calling out he said”; this is redundant in contemporary English style and has been simplified to “he called out.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201677"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201677">77</a> <p><b>sn</b> The rich man had not helped <i>Lazarus</i> before, when he lay outside his gate (v. 20), but he knew him well enough to know his name. This is why the use of the name <i>Lazarus</i> in the parable is significant. (The rich man’s name, on the other hand, is not mentioned, because it is not significant for the point of the story.)</p></p>
<p id="n4201678"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201678">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> The dipping of the <i>tip of his finger in water</i> is evocative of thirst. The thirsty are in need of God’s presence (Ps 42:1-2; Isa 5:13). The imagery suggests the rich man is now separated from the presence of God.</p></p>
<p id="n4201679"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201679">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in terrible pain” (L&amp;N 24.92).</p></p>
<p id="n4201680"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201680">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Fire</i> in this context is OT imagery; see Isa 66:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4201681"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201681">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here is <span class="greek">τέκνον</span> (<span class="translit">teknon</span>), which could be understood as a term of endearment.</p></p>
<p id="n4201682"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201682">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in terrible pain” (L&amp;N 24.92). Here is the reversal Jesus mentioned in Luke 6:20-26.</p></p>
<p id="n4201683"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201683">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And in all these things.” There is no way Lazarus could carry out this request even if divine justice were not involved.</p></p>
<p id="n4201684"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201684">84</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>great chasm</i> between heaven and hell is impassable forever. The rich man’s former status meant nothing now.</p></p>
<p id="n4201685"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201685">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “between us and you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201686"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201686">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the rich man’s response to Abraham’s words.</p></p>
<p id="n4201687"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201687">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the rich man, v. 19) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201688"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201688">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then I beg you, father, that you send him”; the referent (Lazarus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201689"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201689">89</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To warn them</i>. The warning would consist of a call to act differently than their dead brother had, or else meet his current terrible fate.</p></p>
<p id="n4201690"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201690">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “lest they also come.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201691"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201691">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “says.” This is one of the few times Luke uses the historical present.</p></p>
<p id="n4201692"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201692">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “obey”; <i>Grk</i> “hear.” This recalls the many OT texts calling for a righteous heart to respond to people in need (Deut 14:28-29; Isa 3:14-15; Amos 2:6-8; Mic 2:1-2; Zech 7:9-10).</p></p>
<p id="n4201693"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201693">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201694"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201694">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the rich man, v. 19) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201695"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201695">95</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>If someone from the dead goes to them</i>. The irony and joy of the story is that what is denied the rich man’s brothers, a word of warning from beyond the grave, is given to the reader of the Gospel in this exchange.</p></p>
<p id="n4201696"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201696">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201697"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201697">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “obey”; <i>Grk</i> “hear.” See the note on the phrase “respond to” in v. 29.</p></p>
<p id="n4201698"><a href="file1031.xhtml#n4201698">98</a> <p><b>sn</b> The concluding statement of the parable, <i>they will not be convinced even if someone rises from the dead</i>, provides a hint that even Jesus’ resurrection will not help some to respond. The message of God should be good enough. Scripture is the sign to be heeded.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
