<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 John 20</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>John<br />Chapter 20</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Resurrection </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:1</span> Now very early on the first day of the week,<sup><a id="n430201" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n430201">1</a></sup> while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene<sup><a id="n430202" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n430202">2</a></sup> came to the tomb and saw that the stone had been moved away from the entrance.<sup><a id="n430203" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n430203">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:2</span> So she went running<sup><a id="n430204" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n430204">4</a></sup> to Simon Peter and the other disciple whom Jesus loved and told them, “They have taken the Lord from the tomb, and we don’t know where they have put him!” <span class="verse">20:3</span> Then Peter and the other disciple set out to go to the tomb.<sup><a id="n430205" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n430205">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:4</span> The two were running together, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter<sup><a id="n430206" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n430206">6</a></sup> and reached the tomb first.<sup><a id="n430207" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n430207">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:5</span> He bent down<sup><a id="n430208" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n430208">8</a></sup> and saw the strips of linen cloth lying there,<sup><a id="n430209" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n430209">9</a></sup> but he did not go in. <span class="verse">20:6</span> Then Simon Peter, who had been following him, arrived and went right into the tomb. He saw<sup><a id="n4302010" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302010">10</a></sup> the strips of linen cloth lying there, <span class="verse">20:7</span> and the face cloth,<sup><a id="n4302011" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302011">11</a></sup> which had been around Jesus’ head, not lying with the strips of linen cloth but rolled up in a place by itself.<sup><a id="n4302012" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302012">12</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:8</span> Then the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, came in, and he saw and believed.<sup><a id="n4302013" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302013">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:9</span> (For they did not yet understand<sup><a id="n4302014" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302014">14</a></sup> the scripture that Jesus<sup><a id="n4302015" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302015">15</a></sup> must rise from the dead.)<sup><a id="n4302016" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302016">16</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Appearance to Mary Magdalene</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:10</span> So the disciples went back to their homes. <span class="verse">20:11</span> But Mary stood outside the tomb weeping. As she wept, she bent down and looked into the tomb. <span class="verse">20:12</span> And she saw two angels in white sitting where Jesus’ body had been lying, one at the head and one at the feet. <span class="verse">20:13</span> They said<sup><a id="n4302017" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302017">17</a></sup> to her, “Woman,<sup><a id="n4302018" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302018">18</a></sup> why are you weeping?” Mary replied,<sup><a id="n4302019" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302019">19</a></sup> “They have taken my Lord away, and I do not know where they have put him!” <span class="verse">20:14</span> When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there,<sup><a id="n4302020" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302020">20</a></sup> but she did not know that it was Jesus. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:15</span> Jesus said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping? Who are you looking for?” Because she<sup><a id="n4302021" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302021">21</a></sup> thought he was the gardener, she said to him, “Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him, and I will take him.” <span class="verse">20:16</span> Jesus said to her, “Mary.” She<sup><a id="n4302022" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302022">22</a></sup> turned and said to him in Aramaic,<sup><a id="n4302023" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302023">23</a></sup> “<i>Rabboni</i>”<sup><a id="n4302024" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302024">24</a></sup> (which means Teacher).<sup><a id="n4302025" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302025">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:17</span> Jesus replied,<sup><a id="n4302026" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302026">26</a></sup> “Do not touch me, for I have not yet ascended to my Father. Go to my brothers and tell them, ‘I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’” <span class="verse">20:18</span> Mary Magdalene came and informed the disciples, “I have seen the Lord!” And she told them<sup><a id="n4302027" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302027">27</a></sup> what<sup><a id="n4302028" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302028">28</a></sup> Jesus<sup><a id="n4302029" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302029">29</a></sup> had said to her.<sup><a id="n4302030" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302030">30</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus’ Appearance to the Disciples </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:19</span> On the evening of that day, the first day of the week, the disciples had gathered together<sup><a id="n4302031" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302031">31</a></sup> and locked the doors<sup><a id="n4302032" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302032">32</a></sup> of the place<sup><a id="n4302033" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302033">33</a></sup> because they were afraid of the Jewish leaders.<sup><a id="n4302034" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302034">34</a></sup> Jesus came and stood among them and said to them, “Peace be with you.” <span class="verse">20:20</span> When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. Then the disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.<sup><a id="n4302035" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302035">35</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:21</span> So Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you. Just as the Father has sent me, I also send you.” <span class="verse">20:22</span> And after he said this, he breathed on them and said,<sup><a id="n4302036" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302036">36</a></sup> “Receive the Holy Spirit.<sup><a id="n4302037" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302037">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:23</span> If you forgive anyone’s sins, they are forgiven;<sup><a id="n4302038" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302038">38</a></sup> if you retain anyone’s sins, they are retained.”<sup><a id="n4302039" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302039">39</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Response of Thomas</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:24</span> Now Thomas (called Didymus),<sup><a id="n4302040" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302040">40</a></sup> one of the twelve, was not with them when Jesus came. <span class="verse">20:25</span> The other disciples told him, “We have seen the Lord!” But he replied,<sup><a id="n4302041" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302041">41</a></sup> “Unless I see the wounds<sup><a id="n4302042" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302042">42</a></sup> from the nails in his hands, and put my finger into the wounds from the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will never believe it!”<sup><a id="n4302043" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302043">43</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:26</span> Eight days later the disciples were again together in the house,<sup><a id="n4302044" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302044">44</a></sup> and Thomas was with them. Although the doors were locked,<sup><a id="n4302045" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302045">45</a></sup> Jesus came and stood among them and said, “Peace be with you!” <span class="verse">20:27</span> Then he said to Thomas, “Put<sup><a id="n4302046" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302046">46</a></sup> your finger here, and examine<sup><a id="n4302047" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302047">47</a></sup> my hands. Extend<sup><a id="n4302048" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302048">48</a></sup> your hand and put it<sup><a id="n4302049" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302049">49</a></sup> into my side. Do not continue in your unbelief, but believe.”<sup><a id="n4302050" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302050">50</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:28</span> Thomas replied to him,<sup><a id="n4302051" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302051">51</a></sup> “My Lord and my God!”<sup><a id="n4302052" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302052">52</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:29</span> Jesus said to him, “Have you believed because you have seen me? Blessed are the people<sup><a id="n4302053" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302053">53</a></sup> who have not seen and yet have believed.”<sup><a id="n4302054" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302054">54</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">20:30</span> Now Jesus performed<sup><a id="n4302055" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302055">55</a></sup> many other miraculous signs in the presence of the<sup><a id="n4302056" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302056">56</a></sup> disciples, which are not recorded<sup><a id="n4302057" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302057">57</a></sup> in this book.<sup><a id="n4302058" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302058">58</a></sup> <span class="verse">20:31</span> But these<sup><a id="n4302059" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302059">59</a></sup> are recorded<sup><a id="n4302060" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302060">60</a></sup> so that you may believe<sup><a id="n4302061" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302061">61</a></sup> that Jesus is the Christ,<sup><a id="n4302062" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302062">62</a></sup> the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name.<sup><a id="n4302063" href="file1060_notes.xhtml#n4302063">63</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>