<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n420241"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n420241">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The first day of the week</i> is the day after the Sabbath.</p></p>
<p id="n420242"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n420242">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the women mentioned in 23:55) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n420243"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n420243">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term see BDAG 140-41 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄρωμα</span>. See also the note on “aromatic spices” in 23:56.</p></p>
<p id="n420244"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n420244">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n420245"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n420245">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> Luke tells the story of the empty tomb with little drama. He simply notes that when they arrived <i>the stone had been rolled away</i> in a position where the tomb could be entered. This large stone was often placed in a channel so that it could be easily moved by rolling it aside. The other possibility is that it was merely placed over the opening in a position from which it had now been moved.</p></p>
<p id="n420246"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n420246">6</a> <p><b>tc</b> The translation follows the much better attested longer reading here, “body of the Lord Jesus” (found in {<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C L W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 565 700 <span class="apparatus">M</span>}), rather than simply “the body” (found in D it) or “the body of Jesus” (found in 579 1241). Further, although this is the only time that “Lord Jesus” occurs in Luke, it seems to be Luke’s normal designation for the Lord <i>after</i> his resurrection (note the many references to Christ in this manner in Acts, e.g., 1:21; 4:33; 7:59; 8:16; 11:17; 15:11; 16:31; 19:5; 20:21; 28:31). Although such a longer reading as this would normally be suspect, in this case some scribes, accustomed to Luke’s more abbreviated style, did not take the resurrection into account.</p><p><b>sn</b> What they found was not what they expected—an empty tomb.</p></p>
<p id="n420247"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n420247">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that while.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n420248"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n420248">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bewildered.” The term refers to a high state of confusion and anxiety.</p></p>
<p id="n420249"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n420249">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202410"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202410">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> The brilliantly shining clothing (<i>dazzling attire</i>) points to the fact that these are angels (see 24:23).</p></p>
<p id="n4202411"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4202412"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the women) has been specified in the translation for clarity (the same has been done in v. 8).</p></p>
<p id="n4202413"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “They were extremely afraid.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202414"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202414">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Bowed their faces to the ground</i>. Such respect for angels is common: Dan 7:28; 10:9, 15.</p></p>
<p id="n4202415"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202415">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> By referring to Jesus as <i>the living</i>, the angels make it clear that he is alive. There should be no surprise.</p></p>
<p id="n4202416"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202416">16</a> <p><b>tc</b> The phrase “He is not here, but has been raised” is omitted by a few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D it), but it has wide ms support and differs slightly from the similar statement in Matt 28:6 and Mark 16:6. Although NA<sup>28</sup> places the phrase at the beginning of v. 6, as do most modern English translations, it is omitted from the RSV and placed at the end of v. 5 in the NRSV.</p><p><b>tn</b> The verb here is passive (<span class="greek">ἠγέρθη</span>, <span class="translit">ēgerthē</span>). This “divine passive” (see <i>ExSyn</i> 437-38) points to the fact that Jesus was raised by God, and such activity by God is a consistent Lukan theological emphasis: Luke 20:37; 24:34; Acts 3:15; 4:10; 5:30; 10:40; 13:30, 37. A passive construction is also used to refer to Jesus’ exaltation: Luke 24:51; Acts 1:11, 22. </p></p>
<p id="n4202417"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202417">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>While he was still in Galilee</i> looks back to the beginning of Jesus’ ministry. So the point is that this was announced long ago, and should come as no surprise.</p></p>
<p id="n4202418"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying that,” but this would be redundant in English. Although the translation represents this sentence as indirect discourse, the Greek could equally be taken as direct discourse: “Remember how he told you, while he was still in Galilee: ‘the Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and on the third day rise again.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4202419"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> See Luke 9:22, 44; 13:33.</p></p>
<p id="n4202420"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because in the historical context the individuals who were primarily responsible for the death of Jesus (the Jewish leadership in Jerusalem in Luke’s view [see Luke 9:22]) would have been men, the translation “sinful men” for <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων ἁμαρτωλῶν</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn hamartōlōn</span>) is retained here.</p></p>
<p id="n4202421"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202421">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>crucify</i> in 23:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4202422"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the infinitive <span class="greek">ἀναστῆναι</span> (<span class="translit">anastēnai</span>) is active rather than passive.</p></p>
<p id="n4202423"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202424"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202424">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>his words</i> see Luke 9:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4202425"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202425">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> Judas is now absent and “the twelve” have now become “<i>the eleven</i>.” Other disciples are also gathered with the remaining eleven.</p></p>
<p id="n4202426"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202426">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Mary Magdalene</i> is always noted first in the appearance lists in the gospels. It is unusual that the first appearance would involve women as in this culture their role as witnesses would not be well accepted. It is a sign of the veracity of the account, because if an ancient were to create such a story he would never have it start with women.</p></p>
<p id="n4202427"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202427">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>Joanna</i> see Luke 8:1-3.</p></p>
<p id="n4202428"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202428">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>pure nonsense</i> can describe idle talk or a tale. The point is important, since the disciples reacted with disbelief that a resurrection was possible. Sometimes it is thought the ancients were gullible enough to believe anything. But these disciples needed convincing about the resurrection.</p></p>
<p id="n4202429"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202429">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> While the others dismissed the report of the women, Peter <i>got up and ran to the tomb</i>, for he had learned to believe in what the Lord had said.</p></p>
<p id="n4202430"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202430">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> In most instances the entrance to such tombs was less than 3 ft (1 m) high, so that an adult would have to bend down and practically crawl inside.</p></p>
<p id="n4202431"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> In the NT this term is used only for strips of cloth used to wrap a body for burial (LN 6.154; BDAG 693 s.v. <span class="greek">ὀθόνιον</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4202432"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202432">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “went away, wondering to himself.” The prepositional phrase <span class="greek">πρὸς ἑαυτόν</span> (<span class="translit">pros heauton</span>) can be understood with the preceding verb <span class="greek">ἀπῆλθεν</span> (<span class="translit">apēlthen</span>) or with the following participle <span class="greek">θαυμάζων</span> (<span class="translit">thaumazōn</span>), but it more likely belongs with the former (cf. John 20:10, where the phrase can only refer to the verb).</p></p>
<p id="n4202433"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202433">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> Peter’s <i>wondering</i> was not a lack of faith, but struggling in an attempt to understand what could have happened.</p></p>
<p id="n4202434"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202434">34</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D it) lack <b>24:12.</b> The verse has been called a Western noninterpolation, meaning that it reflects a shorter authentic reading in D and other Western witnesses. Many regard all such shorter readings as original (the verse is omitted in the RSV), but the ms evidence for omission is far too slight for the verse to be rejected as secondary. It is included in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> and the rest of the ms tradition.</p></p>
<p id="n4202435"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202435">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic. The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4202436"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202436">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> These are disciples as they know about the empty tomb and do not know what to make of it all.</p></p>
<p id="n4202437"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202437">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sixty stades” or about 11 kilometers. A stade (<span class="greek">στάδιον</span>, <span class="translit">stadion</span>) was a unit of distance about 607 feet (185 meters) long.</p></p>
<p id="n4202439"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202439">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4202440"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202440">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that while.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4202441"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202441">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term suggests emotional dialogue and can thus be translated “debated.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202442"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202442">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “these things” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4202443"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202443">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> The two disciples will not be allowed to recognize Jesus until v. 31.</p></p>
<p id="n4202444"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202444">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is an epexegetical (i.e., explanatory) infinitive in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n4202445"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202445">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> This parenthetical remark by the author is necessary so the reader will understand the account.</p></p>
<p id="n4202446"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202446">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202447"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202447">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “words,” but the term <span class="greek">λόγος</span> (<span class="translit">logos</span>) can refer to “matters” rather than only “words” (BDAG 600 s.v. 1.a.<span class="greek">ε</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4202448"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202448">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Discussing so intently” translates the reciprocal idea conveyed by <span class="greek">πρὸς ἀλλήλους</span> (<span class="translit">pros allēlous</span>). The term <span class="greek">ἀντιβάλλω</span> (<span class="translit">antiballō</span>), used only here in the NT, has the nuance of “arguing” or “debating” a point (the English idiom “to exchange words” also comes close).</p></p>
<p id="n4202449"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202449">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering him, said.” This is redundant in English and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4202450"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202450">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is irony and almost a sense of mocking disbelief as the question “<i>Are you the only visitor to Jerusalem who doesn’t know the things that have happened there in these days?</i>” comes to Jesus, but, of course, the readers know what the travelers do not.</p></p>
<p id="n4202451"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202451">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in it” (referring to the city of Jerusalem).</p></p>
<p id="n4202452"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202452">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4202453"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202453">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> This translates the Greek term <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4202454"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202454">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> The role of Jesus as <i>prophet</i> is a function Luke frequently mentions: 4:25-27; 9:35; 13:31-35.</p></p>
<p id="n4202455"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202455">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Handed him over</i> is another summary of the passion like Luke 9:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4202456"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202456">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>crucify</i> in 23:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4202457"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202457">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb looks back to the view that they held during Jesus’ past ministry.</p></p>
<p id="n4202458"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202458">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> Their messianic hope concerning Jesus is expressed by the phrase <i>who was going to redeem Israel</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4202459"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202459">59</a> <p><b>sn</b> The account in 24:1-12 is repeated here, and it is clear that the other disciples were not convinced by the women, but could not explain the events either.</p></p>
<p id="n4202460"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202460">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> In the Greek text this is a continuation of the previous sentence, but because of the length and complexity of the construction a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4202461"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202461">61</a> <p><b>sn</b> The men in dazzling attire mentioned in v. 4 are identified as <i>angels</i> here.</p></p>
<p id="n4202462"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202462">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202463"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202463">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτόν</span> (<span class="translit">auton</span>), referring to Jesus, is in an emphatic position. The one thing they lacked was solid evidence that he was alive.</p></p>
<p id="n4202464"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202464">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the disciples’ inability to believe in Jesus’ resurrection.</p></p>
<p id="n4202465"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202465">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O,” an interjection used both in address and emotion (BDAG 1101 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4202466"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202466">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied to complete the interjection.</p></p>
<p id="n4202467"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202467">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> The rebuke is for failure to <i>believe</i> the promise of scripture, a theme that will appear in vv. 43-47 as well.</p></p>
<p id="n4202468"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202468">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the syntax of this infinitival construction, see BDAG 364-65 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπί</span> 6.b.</p></p>
<p id="n4202469"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202469">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> This Greek particle (<span class="greek">οὐχί</span>, <span class="translit">ouchi</span>) expects a positive reply.</p></p>
<p id="n4202470"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202470">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> The statement <i>Wasn’t it necessary</i> is a reference to the design of God’s plan (see Luke 24:7). Suffering must precede glory (see Luke 17:25).</p></p>
<p id="n4202471"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202471">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4202472"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202472">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202473"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202473">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> The reference to <i>Moses and all the prophets</i> is a way to say the promise of Messiah runs throughout OT scripture from first to last.</p></p>
<p id="n4202474"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202474">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “regarding,” “concerning.” “Written” is implied by the mention of the scriptures in context; “said” could also be used here, referring to the original utterances, but by now these things had been committed to writing.</p></p>
<p id="n4202475"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202475">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He acted as though he wanted to go farther</i>. This is written in a way that gives the impression Jesus knew they would ask him to stay.</p></p>
<p id="n4202476"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202476">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “urged him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>, “saying”) has not been translated because it is redundant in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n4202477"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202477">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the disciples’ request.</p></p>
<p id="n4202478"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202478">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that when.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4202479"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202479">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “had reclined at table,” as 1st century middle eastern meals were not eaten while sitting at a table, but while reclining on one’s side on the floor with the head closest to the low table and the feet farthest away.</p></p>
<p id="n4202480"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202480">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> The pronoun “it” is not in the Greek text here or in the following clause, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4202481"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202481">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “At this point” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative. “Then,” which is normally used to indicate this, would be redundant with the following clause.</p></p>
<p id="n4202482"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202482">82</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They recognized him</i>. Other than this cryptic remark, it is not told how the two disciples were now able to recognize Jesus. </p></p>
<p id="n4202483"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202483">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> This pronoun is somewhat emphatic.</p></p>
<p id="n4202484"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202484">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> This translates a <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”) that has clear sequential force. </p></p>
<p id="n4202485"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202485">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4202486"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202486">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> This question uses a Greek particle (<span class="greek">οὐχί</span>, <span class="translit">ouchi</span>) that expects a positive reply.</p></p>
<p id="n4202487"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202487">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a collective singular use of the term <span class="greek">καρδία</span> (<span class="translit">kardia</span>), so each of their hearts were burning, a reference itself to the intense emotion of their response.</p></p>
<p id="n4202488"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202488">88</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have the phrase <span class="greek">ἐν ἡμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">en hēmin</span>, “within us”) after <span class="greek">οὐχὶ ἡ καρδία ἡμῶν καιομένη ἦν</span> (<span class="translit">ouchi hē kardia hēmōn kaiomenē ēn</span>, “Didn’t our hearts burn”). The phrase “within us” is lacking in some early <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> B D c e sy<sup>s,c</sup>). These early witnesses could have overlooked the words, since there are several occurrences of <span class="greek">ἡμῖν</span> in the context. But it seems likely that other scribes wanted to clarify the abrupt expression “Didn’t our hearts burn,” even as the translation has done here. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the words in brackets, indicating doubts as to their authenticity.</p><p><b>sn</b> Even though it is most likely not original (see <b>tc</b> note above), the phrase <i>within us</i> has been included in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202489"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202489">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “opening” (cf. Acts 17:3).</p></p>
<p id="n4202490"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202490">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the Lord’s appearance to them.</p></p>
<p id="n4202492"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202492">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4202493"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202493">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the word “and” has been supplied to make it clear that the disciples who had been to Emmaus found the eleven plus the others gathered and saying this.</p></p>
<p id="n4202494"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202494">94</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Lord…has appeared to Simon</i>. Jesus had made another appearance besides the one on the road. The excitement was rising. <i>Simon</i> refers to Simon Peter.</p></p>
<p id="n4202495"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202495">95</a> <p><b>sn</b> Now with the recounting of <i>what had happened on the road</i> two sets of witnesses corroborate the women’s report.</p></p>
<p id="n4202496"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202496">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “how he was made known to them”; or “how he was recognized by them.” Here the passive construction has been converted to an active one in the translation in keeping with contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4202497"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202497">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202498"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202498">98</a> <p><b>tc</b> The words “and said to them, ‘Peace be with you’” are lacking in some Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D it). But the clause is otherwise well attested, being found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> and the rest of the ms tradition, and should be considered an original part of Luke.</p></p>
<p id="n4202499"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n4202499">99</a> <p><b>sn</b> The disciples were still not comfortable at this point thinking that this could be Jesus raised from the dead. Instead they thought <i>they saw a spirit</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n42024100"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024100">100</a> <p><b>tc</b> This is not a reference to “a phantom” as read by the Western ms D. For <span class="greek">πνεῦμα</span> (<span class="translit">pneuma</span>) having the force of “ghost,” or “an independent noncorporeal being, in contrast to a being that can be perceived by the physical senses,” see BDAG 833-34 s.v. <span class="greek">πνεῦμα</span> 4.</p></p>
<p id="n42024101"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42024102"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “disturbed,” “troubled.”</p></p>
<p id="n42024103"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression here is an idiom; see BDAG 58 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναβαίνω</span> 2. Here <span class="greek">καρδία</span> (<span class="translit">kardia</span>) is a collective singular; the expression has been translated as plural in English.</p><p><b>sn</b> Jesus calls the disciples to faith with a gentle rebuke about <i>doubts</i> and a gracious invitation to see for themselves the evidence of his resurrection.</p></p>
<p id="n42024104"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that it is I myself.”</p></p>
<p id="n42024105"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> See <b>tc</b> note on “ghost” in v. 37. </p></p>
<p id="n42024106"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024106">106</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D it) lack <b>24:40</b>. However, it is present in all other <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, including <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup>, and should thus be regarded as an original part of Luke’s Gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n42024107"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They still could not believe it</i>. Is this a continued statement of unbelief? Or is it a rhetorical expression of their amazement? They are being moved to faith, so a rhetorical force is more likely here.</p></p>
<p id="n42024108"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024108">108</a> <p><b>sn</b> Amazement is the common response to unusual activity: 1:63; 2:18; 4:22; 7:9; 8:25; 9:43; 11:14; 20:26.</p></p>
<p id="n42024109"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024109">109</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Do you have anything here to eat?</i> Eating would remove the idea that a phantom was present. Angelic spirits refused a meal in Judg 13:16 and Tob 12:19, but accepted it in Gen 18:8; 19:3 and Tob 6:6. (Tobit, a book of the OT Apocrypha, reflects views during the intertestamental period.)</p></p>
<p id="n42024110"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Jesus’ request for food.</p></p>
<p id="n42024111"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42024112"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024112">112</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Everything written about me</i>. The divine plan, events, and scripture itself are seen here as being one.</p></p>
<p id="n42024113"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024113">113</a> <p><b>sn</b> For a similar threefold division of the OT scriptures, see the prologue to Sirach, lines 8-10, and from Qumran, the epilogue to 4QMMT, line 10.</p></p>
<p id="n42024114"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024114">114</a> <p><b>sn</b> Luke does not mention specific texts here, but it is likely that many of the <i>scriptures</i> he mentioned elsewhere in Luke-Acts would have been among those he had in mind.</p></p>
<p id="n42024115"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n42024116"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> Three Greek infinitives are the key to this summary: (1) to suffer, (2) to rise, and (3) to be preached. The Christ (Messiah) would be slain, would be raised, and a message about repentance would go out into all the world as a result. All of this was recorded in the scripture. The remark shows the continuity between Jesus’ ministry, the scripture, and what disciples would be doing as they declared the Lord risen.</p></p>
<p id="n42024117"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024117">117</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>repentance</i> has its roots in declarations of the Old Testament. It is the Hebrew concept of a turning of direction.</p></p>
<p id="n42024118"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “preached,” “announced.”</p></p>
<p id="n42024119"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024119">119</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To all nations</i>. The same Greek term (<span class="greek">τὰ ἔθνη</span>, <span class="translit">ta ethnē</span>) may be translated “the Gentiles” or “the nations.” The hope of God in Christ was for all the nations from the beginning.</p></p>
<p id="n42024120"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024120">120</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Beginning from Jerusalem</i>. See Acts 2, which is where it all starts.</p></p>
<p id="n42024121"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024121">121</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>You are witnesses</i>. This becomes a key concept of testimony in Acts. See Acts 1:8.</p></p>
<p id="n42024122"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sending on you.” </p></p>
<p id="n42024123"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the promise of my Father,” with <span class="greek">τοῦ πατρός</span> (<span class="translit">tou patros</span>) translated as a subjective genitive. This is a reference to the Holy Spirit and looks back to how one could see Messiah had come with the promise of old (Luke 3:15-18). The promise is rooted in Jer 31:31 and Ezek 36:26.</p></p>
<p id="n42024124"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024124">124</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The city</i> refers to Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n42024125"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024125">125</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Until you have been clothed with power</i> refers to the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost. What the Spirit supplies is enablement. See Luke 12:11-12; 21:12-15. The difference the Spirit makes can be seen in Peter (compare Luke 22:54-62 with Acts 2:14-41).</p></p>
<p id="n42024126"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42024127"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42024128"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024128">128</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Bethany</i> was village on the Mount of Olives about 2 mi (3 km) from Jerusalem; see John 11:1, 18.</p></p>
<p id="n42024129"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that while.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. </p></p>
<p id="n42024130"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “while he blessed them.”</p></p>
<p id="n42024131"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he departed from them.”</p></p>
<p id="n42024132"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024132">132</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reference to the ascension (“and was taken up into heaven”) is lacking in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* D it sy<sup>s</sup>, but it is found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> and the rest of the ms tradition. The authenticity of the statement here seems to be presupposed in Acts 1:2, for otherwise it is difficult to account for Luke’s reference to the ascension there. For a helpful discussion, see <i>TCGNT</i> 162-63.</p><p><b>tn</b> For the translation of <span class="greek">ἀνεφέρετο</span> (<span class="translit">anephereto</span>) as “was taken up” see BDAG 75 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναφέρω</span> 1.</p><p><b>sn</b> There is great debate whether this event equals Acts 1:9-11 so that Luke has telescoped something here that he describes in more detail later. The text can be read in this way because the temporal marker in v. 50 is vague. </p></p>
<p id="n42024133"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the result of Jesus’ ascension and the concluding summary of Luke’s Gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n42024134"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024134">134</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reference to worship is lacking in the Western ms D, its last major omission in this Gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n42024135"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024135">135</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Joy</i> is another key theme for Luke: 1:14; 2:10; 8:13; 10:17; 15:7, 10; 24:41.</p></p>
<p id="n42024136"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the temple.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Luke’s gospel story proper ends where it began, <i>in the temple courts</i> (Luke 1:4-22). The conclusion is open-ended, because the story continues in Acts with what happened from Jerusalem onwards, once the promise of the Father (v. 49) came.</p></p>
<p id="n42024137"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024137">137</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Western text (D it) has <span class="greek">αἰνοῦντες</span> (<span class="translit">ainountes</span>, “praising”) here, while the Alexandrian <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C* L) have <span class="greek">εὐλογοῦντες</span> (<span class="translit">eulogountes</span>, “blessing”). Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially the later Byzantine <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, evidently combine these two readings with <span class="greek">αἰνοῦντες καὶ εὐλογοῦντες</span> (A C<sup>2</sup> W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat). It is more difficult to decide between the two earlier readings. Internal arguments can go either way, but what seems decisive in this instance are the superior witnesses for <span class="greek">εὐλογοῦντες</span>. </p></p>
<p id="n42024138"><a href="file1039.xhtml#n42024138">138</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, some of which are significant witnesses (A B C<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), add “Amen” to note the Gospel’s end. Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Further, since significant witnesses lack the word (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C* D L W 1 33 it co), it is evidently not original.</p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
