<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 16</h2>
<p id="n660161"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n660161">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660162"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n660162">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “anger.” Here <span class="greek">τοῦ θυμοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou thumou</span>) has been translated as a genitive of content.</p></p>
<p id="n660163"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n660163">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the directions given by the voice from the temple.</p></p>
<p id="n660164"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n660164">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the first”; the referent (the first angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n660165"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n660165">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660166"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n660166">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “ulcerated sores”; the term in the Greek text is singular but is probably best understood as a collective singular.</p></p>
<p id="n660167"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n660167">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> ‘the men,” but this is a generic use of <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) and refers to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n660168"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n660168">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “next” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660169"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n660169">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the second”; the referent (the second angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601610"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601611"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the third”; the referent (the third angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601612"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the somewhat parenthetical nature of the remarks that follow.</p></p>
<p id="n6601613"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “righteous,” although the context favors justice as the theme.</p></p>
<p id="n6601614"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because you have judged these things.” The pronoun <span class="greek">ταῦτα</span> (<span class="translit">tauta</span>) is neuter gender.</p></p>
<p id="n6601615"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that this judgment is the result of what these wicked people did to the saints and prophets.</p></p>
<p id="n6601616"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They are worthy”; i.e., of this kind of punishment. By extension, “they got what they deserve.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601617"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601618"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the altar saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601619"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this word BDAG 755 s.v. <span class="greek">παντοκράτωρ</span> states, “the <i>Almighty, All-Powerful, Omnipotent</i> (<i>One</i>) only of God…(<span class="greek">ὁ</span>)<span class="greek"> κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ π</span>.…Rv 1:8; 4:8; 11:17; 15:3; 16:7; 21:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601620"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601621"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the fourth”; the referent (the fourth angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601622"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601622">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men,” but this is a generic use of <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) and refers to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n6601623"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601623">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “thus” to indicate the implied result of the bowl poured on the sun.</p></p>
<p id="n6601624"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men,” but this is a generic use of <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) and refers to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n6601625"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601625">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this phrase BDAG 536 s.v. <span class="greek">καῦμα</span> states, “<i>burning, heat</i> Rv 7:16…<span class="greek">καυματίζεσθαι κ</span>.<span class="greek"> μέγα</span> <i>be burned with a scorching heat</i> 16:9.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601626"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601626">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “yet” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6601627"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation “ruling authority” for <span class="greek">ἐξουσία</span> (<span class="translit">exousia</span>) see L&amp;N 37.35.</p></p>
<p id="n6601628"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601628">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601629"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601629">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the fifth”; the referent (the fifth angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601630"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so that” to indicate the implied result of the fifth bowl being poured out.</p></p>
<p id="n6601631"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601631">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his kingdom became dark.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601632"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men,” but this is a generic use of <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) and refers to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n6601633"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601633">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 620 s.v. <span class="greek">μασάομαι</span> states, “<i>bite</i> w. acc. <span class="greek">τὰς γλώσσας</span> <i>bite their tongues</i> Rv 16:10.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601634"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601634">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The preposition <span class="greek">ἐκ</span> (<span class="translit">ek</span>) has been translated here and twice in the following verse with a causal sense.</p></p>
<p id="n6601635"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601635">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “pains” (the same term in Greek [<span class="greek">πόνος</span>, <span class="translit">ponos</span>] as the last word in v. 11, here translated “sufferings” because it is plural). BDAG 852 s.v. 2 states, “<span class="greek">ἐκ τοῦ π</span>. <i>in pain</i>…Rv 16:10; pl. (Gen 41:51; Jos., C. Ap. 2, 146; Test. Jud. 18:4) <span class="greek">ἐκ τῶν π</span>.<span class="greek">…</span><i>because of their sufferings</i> vs. 11.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601636"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601636">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “ulcerated sores” (see 16:2).</p></p>
<p id="n6601637"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601637">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and they did not repent.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but nevertheless” to express the contrast here.</p></p>
<p id="n6601638"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601638">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they did not repent” The addition of “still refused” reflects the hardness of people’s hearts in the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6601639"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601639">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601640"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601640">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the sixth”; the referent (the sixth angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601641"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601641">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and its water was dried up.” Here the passive construction has been translated as an active one.</p></p>
<p id="n6601642"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601642">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in order that the way might be prepared.” Here the passive construction has been translated as an active one.</p></p>
<p id="n6601643"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601643">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the rising of the sun.” BDAG 74 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνατολή</span> 2.a takes this as a geographical direction: “<span class="greek">ἀπὸ ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἡλίου</span>…<i>from the east</i> Rv 7:2; 16:12; simply <span class="greek">ἀπὸ ἀ</span>.…21:13.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601644"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601644">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601645"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601645">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> According to the next verse, these <i>three unclean spirits</i> are spirits of demons.</p></p>
<p id="n6601646"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601646">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 699 s.v. <span class="greek">οἰκουμένη</span> 1 states, “<i>the inhabited earth, the world</i>…<span class="greek">ὅλη ἡ οἰκ</span>. <i>the whole inhabited earth</i>…Mt 24:14; Ac 11:28; Rv 3:10; 16:14.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601647"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601647">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this word BDAG 755 s.v. <span class="greek">παντοκράτωρ</span> states, “the <i>Almighty, All-Powerful, Omnipotent</i> (<i>One</i>) only of God…(<span class="greek">ὁ</span>)<span class="greek"> κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ π</span>.…Rv 1:8; 4:8; 11:17; 15:3; 16:7; 21:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601648"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601648">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and keeps.” BDAG 1002 s.v. <span class="greek">τηρέω</span> 2.c states “of holding on to someth. so as not to give it up or lose it…<span class="greek">τὰ ἱμάτια αὐτοῦ</span> Rv 16:15 (or else he will have to go naked).”</p></p>
<p id="n6601649"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601649">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the translation of <span class="greek">ἀσχημοσύνη</span> (<span class="translit">aschēmosunē</span>) as “shameful condition” see L&amp;N 25.202. The indefinite third person plural (“and they see”) has been translated as a passive here.</p></p>
<p id="n6601650"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601650">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> These lines are parenthetical, forming an aside to the narrative. The speaker here is the Lord Jesus Christ himself rather than the narrator. Many interpreters have seen this verse as so abrupt that it could not be an original part of the work, but the author has used such asides before (1:7; 14:13) and the suddenness here (on the eve of Armageddon) is completely parallel to Jesus’ warning in Mark 13:15-16 and parallels.</p></p>
<p id="n6601651"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601651">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the resumption and conclusion of the remarks about the pouring out of the sixth bowl.</p></p>
<p id="n6601652"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601652">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the demonic spirits, v. 14) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601653"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601653">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “gathered them”; the referent (the kings and [implied] their armies, v. 14) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601654"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601654">54</a> <p><b>tc</b> There are many variations in the spelling of this name among the Greek <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, although <span class="greek">῾Αρμαγεδών</span> (<span class="translit">harmagedōn</span>) has the best support. The usual English spelling is Armageddon, used in the translation.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “Harmagedon” (a literal transliteration of the Greek), or “Har-Magedon” (NASB), meaning “the Mount of Magedon” in Hebrew.</p></p>
<p id="n6601655"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601655">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “finally” to indicate the conclusion of the seven bowl judgments.</p></p>
<p id="n6601656"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601656">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the seventh”; the referent (the seventh angel) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601657"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601657">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601658"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601658">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sounds,” “voices.” It is not entirely clear what this refers to. BDAG 1071 s.v. <span class="greek">φωνή</span> 1 states, “In Rv we have <span class="greek">ἀστραπαὶ καὶ φωναὶ καὶ βρονταί</span> (cp. Ex 19:16) 4:5; 8:5; 11:19; 16:18 (are certain other sounds in nature thought of here in addition to thunder, as e.g. the roar of the storm?…).”</p></p>
<p id="n6601659"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601659">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> The singular <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used generically here to refer to the human race.</p></p>
<p id="n6601660"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601660">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601661"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601661">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of the Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601662"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601662">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fell.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601663"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601663">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Babylon’s misdeeds (see Rev 14:8).</p></p>
<p id="n6601664"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601664">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the cup of the wine of the anger of the wrath of him.” The concatenation of four genitives has been rendered somewhat differently by various translations (see the note on the word “wrath”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601665"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601665">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Following BDAG 461 s.v. <span class="greek">θυμός</span> 2, the combination of the genitives of <span class="greek">θυμός</span> (<span class="translit">thumos</span>) and <span class="greek">ὀργή</span> (<span class="translit">orgē</span>) in Rev 16:19 and 19:15 are taken to be a strengthening of the thought as in the OT and Qumran literature (Exod 32:12; Jer 32:37; Lam 2:3; CD 10:9). Thus in Rev 14:8 (to which the present passage alludes) and 18:3 there is irony: The wine of immoral behavior with which Babylon makes the nations drunk becomes the wine of God’s wrath for her.</p></p>
<p id="n6601666"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601666">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And every.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601667"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601667">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “vanished.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601668"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601668">68</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Every island fled away and no mountains could be found</i>. Major geographical and topographical changes will accompany the Day of the Lord.</p></p>
<p id="n6601669"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601669">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here BDAG 988 s.v. <span class="greek">ταλαντιαῖος</span> states, “<i>weighing a talent</i>…<span class="greek">χάλαζα μεγάλη ὡς ταλαντιαία</span> <i>a severe hailstorm</i> with hailstones <i>weighing a talent</i> (the talent=125 librae, or Roman pounds of c. 343 gr. or 12 ounces each) (<i>weighing about a 100 pounds</i> NRSV) Rv 16:21.” This means each hailstone would weigh just under 100 pounds or 40 kilograms.</p></p>
<p id="n6601670"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601670">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the sky.” Due to the apocalyptic nature of this book, it is probably best to leave the translation as “from heaven,” since God is ultimately the source of the judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n6601671"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601671">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on men,” but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used here in a generic sense to refer to people in general (the hailstones did not single out adult males, but would have also fallen on women and children).</p></p>
<p id="n6601672"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601672">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the men”; for stylistic reasons the pronoun “they” is used here.</p></p>
<p id="n6601673"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601673">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the plague of it.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601674"><a href="file1249.xhtml#n6601674">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “since the plague of it was exceedingly great.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
