<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 2</h2>
<p id="n440021"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n440021">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic. Greek style often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” but English style does not.</p></p>
<p id="n440022"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n440022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated for stylistic reasons. It occurs as part of the formula <span class="greek">καὶ ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">kai egeneto</span>) which is often left untranslated in Luke-Acts because it is redundant in contemporary English. Here it is possible (and indeed necessary) to translate <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> as “came” so that the initial clause of the English translation contains a verb; nevertheless the translation of the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> is not necessary.</p></p>
<p id="n440023"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n440023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a noise.”</p></p>
<p id="n440024"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n440024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> While <span class="greek">φέρω</span> (<span class="translit">pherō</span>) generally refers to movement from one place to another with the possible implication of causing the movement of other objects, in Acts 2:2 <span class="greek">φέρομαι</span> (<span class="translit">pheromai</span>) should probably be understood in a more idiomatic sense of “blowing” since it is combined with the noun for wind (<span class="greek">πνοή</span>, <span class="translit">pnoē</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n440025"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n440025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from the sky.” The Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) may be translated “sky” or “heaven” depending on the context.</p></p>
<p id="n440026"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n440026">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “And divided tongues as of fire.” The precise meaning of <span class="greek">διαμερίζομαι</span> (<span class="translit">diamerizomai</span>) in Acts 2:3 is difficult to determine. The meaning could be “tongues as of fire dividing up one to each person,” but it is also possible that the individual tongues of fire were divided (“And divided tongues as of fire appeared”). The translation adopted in the text (“tongues spreading out like a fire”) attempts to be somewhat ambiguous.</p></p>
<p id="n440027"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n440027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And all.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n440028"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n440028">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term is <span class="greek">γλώσσαις</span> (<span class="translit">glōssais</span>), the same word used for the tongues of fire.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Other languages</i>. Acts 2:6-7 indicates that these were languages understandable to the hearers, a diverse group from “every nation under heaven.”</p></p>
<p id="n440029"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n440029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “just as the spirit gave them to utter.” The verb <span class="greek">ἀποφθέγγομαι</span> (<span class="translit">apophthengomai</span>) was used of special utterances in Classical Greek (BDAG 125 s.v.).</p></p>
<p id="n4400210"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jews, devout men.” It is possible that only men are in view here in light of OT commands for Jewish men to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem at various times during the year (cf. Exod 23:17; 34:23; Deut 16:16). However, other evidence seems to indicate that both men and women might be in view. Luke 2:41-52 shows that whole families would make the temporary trip to Jerusalem. In addition, it is probable that the audience consisted of families who had taken up permanent residence in Jerusalem. The verb <span class="greek">κατοικέω</span> (<span class="translit">katoikeō</span>) normally means “reside” or “dwell,” and archaeological evidence from tombs in Jerusalem does indicate that many families immigrated to Jerusalem permanently (see B. Witherington, <i>Acts</i>, 135); this would naturally include women. Also, the word <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which usually does mean “male” or “man” (as opposed to woman), sometimes is used generically to mean “a person” (BDAG 79 s.v. 2; cf. Matt 12:41). Given this evidence, then, it is conceivable that the audience in view here is not individual male pilgrims but a mixed group of men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n4400211"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now there were residing in Jerusalem Jews, devout men from every nation under heaven.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400212"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “this noise.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400213"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was bewildered.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400214"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They were astounded and amazed, saying.” The two imperfect verbs, <span class="greek">ἐξίσταντο</span> (<span class="translit">existanto</span>) and <span class="greek">ἐθαύμαζον</span> (<span class="translit">ethaumazon</span>), show both the surprise and the confusion on the part of the hearers. The verb <span class="greek">ἐξίσταντο</span> (from <span class="greek">ἐξίστημι</span>, <span class="translit">existēmi</span>) often implies an illogical perception or response (BDAG 350 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐξίστημι</span>): “to be so astonished as to almost fail to comprehend what one has experienced” (L&amp;N 25.218).</p></p>
<p id="n4400215"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold, aren’t all these.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4400216"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “we hear them, each one of us.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400217"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in our own language in which we were born.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400218"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n4400219"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to BDAG 595 s.v. <span class="greek">Λιβύη</span>, the western part of Libya, Libya Cyrenaica, is referred to here (see also Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 16.6.1 [16.160] for a similar phrase).</p></p>
<p id="n4400221"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400221">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Proselytes</i> refers to Gentile (i.e., non-Jewish) converts to Judaism.</p></p>
<p id="n4400222"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “God’s mighty works.” Here the genitive <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou theou</span>) has been translated as a subjective genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n4400223"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the speakers” are not in the Greek text, but have been supplied for clarity. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4400224"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They are full of new wine!” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>New wine</i> refers to a new, sweet wine in the process of fermentation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400225"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “standing up.” The participle <span class="greek">σταθείς</span> (<span class="translit">statheis</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400226"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “You Jewish men.” “Judea” is preferred here because it is paired with “Jerusalem,” a location. This suggests locality rather than ethnic background is the primary emphasis in the context. As for “men,” the Greek term here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which only exceptionally is used in a generic sense of both males and females. In this context, where “all” who live in Jerusalem are addressed, it is conceivable that this is a generic usage, although it can also be argued that Peter’s remarks were addressed primarily to the men present, even if women were there.</p></p>
<p id="n4400228"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let this be known to you.” </p></p>
<p id="n4400229"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “These men are not drunk, as you suppose.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400230"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “only the third hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400231"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400231">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note how in the quotation that follows all genders, ages, and classes are included. The event is like a hope Moses expressed in Num 11:29.</p></p>
<p id="n4400232"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400232">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>in the last days</i> is not quoted from Joel, but represents Peter’s interpretive explanation of the current events as falling “in the last days.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400233"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on all flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400234"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “slaves.” Although this translation frequently renders <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) as “slave,” the connotation is often of one who has sold himself into slavery; in a spiritual sense, the idea is that of becoming a slave of God or of Jesus Christ voluntarily. The voluntary notion is conspicuous here; hence the translation “servants.” In any case, the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force.</p></p>
<p id="n4400235"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400235">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> The words <i>and they will prophesy</i> in Acts 2:18 are not quoted from Joel 2:29 at this point but are repeated from earlier in the quotation (Acts 2:17) for emphasis. Tongues speaking is described as prophecy, just like intelligible tongues are described in 1 Cor 14:26-33.</p></p>
<p id="n4400236"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the heaven.” The Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) may be translated “sky” or “heaven” depending on the context. Here, in contrast to “the earth below,” a reference to the sky is more likely.</p></p>
<p id="n4400237"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the context indicates the miraculous nature of the signs mentioned; this is made explicit in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400238"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and wonderful.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400239"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it will be that.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400240"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400240">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Joel 2:28-32.</p></p>
<p id="n4400241"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Israelite men,” although this is less natural English. The Greek term here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which only exceptionally is used in a generic sense of both males and females. In this context, it is conceivable that this is a generic usage, although it can also be argued that Peter’s remarks were addressed primarily to the men present, even if women were there.</p></p>
<p id="n4400242"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “miraculous deeds.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400243"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Again, the context indicates the miraculous nature of these signs, and this is specified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400244"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400244">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you killed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400245"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at the hands of lawless men.” At this point the term <span class="greek">ἄνομος</span> (<span class="translit">anomos</span>) refers to non-Jews who live outside the Jewish (Mosaic) law, rather than people who broke any or all laws including secular laws. Specifically it is a reference to the Roman soldiers who carried out Jesus’ crucifixion.</p></p>
<p id="n4400246"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Whom God raised up.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400247"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400247">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “having freed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400248"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400248">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term translated <i>pains</i> is frequently used to describe pains associated with giving birth (see Rev 12:2). So there is irony here in the mixed metaphor.</p></p>
<p id="n4400249"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400249">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for him to be held by it” (in either case, “it” refers to death’s power).</p></p>
<p id="n4400250"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400250">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “always before me.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400251"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400252"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400252">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “will not abandon my soul to Hades.” Often “Hades” is the equivalent of the Hebrew term Sheol, the place of the dead.</p></p>
<p id="n4400253"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400253">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to see,” but the literal translation of the phrase “to see decay” could be misunderstood to mean simply “to look at decay,” while here “see decay” is really figurative for “experience decay.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400254"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400254">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 16:8-11.</p></p>
<p id="n4400255"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400255">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Since this represents a continuation of the address beginning in v.14 and continued in v. 22, “brothers” has been used here rather than a generic expression like “brothers and sisters.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400256"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400256">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> Peter’s certainty is based on well-known facts.</p></p>
<p id="n4400257"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400257">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “about our noted ancestor,” “about the patriarch.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400258"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400258">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participles <span class="greek">ὑπάρχων</span> (<span class="translit">huparchōn</span>) and <span class="greek">εἰδώς</span> (<span class="translit">eidōs</span>) are translated as causal adverbial participles.</p></p>
<p id="n4400259"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400259">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “one from the fruit of his loins.” “Loins” is the traditional translation of <span class="greek">ὀσφῦς</span> (<span class="translit">osphus</span>), referring to the male genital organs. A literal rendering like “one who came from his genital organs” would be regarded as too specific and perhaps even vulgar by many contemporary readers. Most modern translations thus render the phrase “one of his descendants.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400260"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400260">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 132:11 and 2 Sam 7:12-13, the promise in the Davidic covenant.</p></p>
<p id="n4400261"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400261">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “David foreseeing spoke.” The participle <span class="greek">προϊδών</span> (<span class="translit">proidōn</span>) is taken as indicating means. It could also be translated as a participle of attendant circumstance: “David foresaw [this] and spoke.” The word “this” is supplied in either case as an understood direct object (direct objects in Greek were often omitted, but must be supplied for the modern English reader).</p></p>
<p id="n4400262"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400262">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The term <span class="greek">χριστός</span> (<span class="translit">christos</span>) was originally an adjective (“anointed”), developing in LXX into a substantive (“an anointed one”), then developing still further into a technical generic term (“the anointed one”). In the intertestamental period it developed further into a technical term referring to the hoped-for anointed one, that is, a specific individual. In the NT the development starts there (technical-specific), is so used in the gospels, and then develops in Paul’s letters to mean virtually Jesus’ last name.</p></p>
<p id="n4400263"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400263">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “abandoned in the world of the dead.” The translation “world of the dead” for Hades is suggested by L&amp;N 1.19. The phrase is an allusion to Ps 16:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4400264"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400264">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “flesh.” See vv. 26b-27. The reference to “body” in this verse picks up the reference to “body” in v. 26. The Greek term <span class="greek">σάρξ</span> (<span class="translit">sarx</span>) in both verses literally means “flesh”; however, the translation “body” stresses the lack of decay of his physical body. The point of the verse is not merely the lack of decay of his flesh alone, but the resurrection of his entire person, as indicated by the previous parallel line “he was not abandoned to Hades.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400265"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400265">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “see,” but the literal translation of the phrase “see decay” could be misunderstood to mean simply “look at decay,” while here “see decay” is really figurative for “experience decay.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400266"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400266">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 16:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4400267"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400267">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of him”; <i>Grk</i> “of which [or whom] we are all witnesses” (Acts 1:8).</p></p>
<p id="n4400268"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400268">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> The aorist participle <span class="greek">ὑψωθείς</span> (<span class="translit">hupsōtheis</span>) could be taken temporally: “So then, after he was exalted…” In the translation the more neutral “exalted” (a shorter form of “having been exalted”) was used to preserve the ambiguity of the original Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n4400269"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400269">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>the right hand of God</i> represents supreme power and authority. Its use here sets up the quotation of Ps 110:1 in v. 34.</p></p>
<p id="n4400270"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400270">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> The aorist participle <span class="greek">λαβών</span> (<span class="translit">labōn</span>) could be taken temporally: “So then, after he was exalted…and received from the Father the promised Holy Spirit.” In the translation the more neutral “having received” was used to preserve the ambiguity of the original Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n4400271"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400271">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the genitive <span class="greek">τοῦ πνεύματος</span> (<span class="translit">tou pneumatos</span>) is a genitive of apposition; the promise consists of the Holy Spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n4400272"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400272">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> The use of the verb <i>poured out</i> looks back to 2:17-18, where the same verb occurs twice.</p></p>
<p id="n4400273"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400273">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Sit at my right hand</i>. The word “sit” alludes back to the promise of “seating one on his throne” in v. 30.</p></p>
<p id="n4400274"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400274">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> The metaphor <i>make your enemies a footstool</i> portrays the complete subjugation of the enemies.</p></p>
<p id="n4400275"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400275">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 110:1, one of the most often-cited OT passages in the NT, pointing to the exaltation of Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4400276"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400276">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “know for certain.” This term is in an emphatic position in the clause.</p></p>
<p id="n4400277"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400277">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified.” The clause has been simplified in the translation by replacing the pronoun “him” with the explanatory clause “this Jesus whom you crucified” which comes at the end of the sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n4400278"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400278">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lord</i>. This looks back to the quotation of Ps 110:1 and the mention of “calling on the Lord” in 2:21. Peter’s point is that the Lord on whom one calls for salvation is Jesus, because he is the one mediating God’s blessing of the Spirit as a sign of the presence of salvation and the last days.</p></p>
<p id="n4400279"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400279">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:31.</p></p>
<p id="n4400280"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400280">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “this” is not in the Greek text. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4400281"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400281">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they were pierced to the heart” (an idiom for acute emotional distress).</p></p>
<p id="n4400282"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400282">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb is a third person imperative, but the common translation “let each of you be baptized” obscures the imperative force in English, since it sounds more like a permissive (“each of you may be baptized”) to the average English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4400283"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400283">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>In the name of Jesus Christ</i>. Baptism in Messiah Jesus’ name shows how much authority he possesses.</p></p>
<p id="n4400284"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400284">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is debate over the meaning of <span class="greek">εἰς</span> in the prepositional phrase <span class="greek">εἰς ἄφεσιν τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">eis aphesin tōn hamartiōn humōn</span>, “for/because of/with reference to the forgiveness of your sins”). Although a causal sense has been argued, it is difficult to maintain here. <i>ExSyn</i> 369-71 discusses at least four other ways of dealing with the passage: (1) The baptism referred to here is physical only, and <span class="greek">εἰς</span> has the meaning of “for” or “unto.” Such a view suggests that salvation is based on works—an idea that runs counter to the theology of Acts, namely: (a) repentance often precedes baptism (cf. Acts 3:19; 26:20), and (b) salvation is entirely a gift of God, not procured via water baptism (Acts 10:43 [cf. v. 47]; 13:38-39, 48; 15:11; 16:30-31; 20:21; 26:18); (2) The baptism referred to here is spiritual only. Although such a view fits well with the theology of Acts, it does not fit well with the obvious meaning of “baptism” in Acts—especially in this text (cf. 2:41); (3) The text should be repunctuated in light of the shift from second person plural to third person singular back to second person plural again. The idea then would be, “Repent <i>for/with reference to</i> your sins, and let each one of you be baptized…” Such a view is an acceptable way of handling <span class="greek">εἰς</span>, but its subtlety and awkwardness count against it; (4) Finally, it is possible that to a first-century Jewish audience (as well as to Peter), the idea of baptism might incorporate both the spiritual reality and the physical symbol. That Peter connects both closely in his thinking is clear from other passages such as Acts 10:47 and 11:15-16. If this interpretation is correct, then Acts 2:38 is saying very little about the specific theological relationship between the symbol and the reality, only that historically they were viewed together. One must look in other places for a theological analysis. For further discussion see R. N. Longenecker, “Acts,” <i>EBC</i> 9:283-85; B. Witherington, <i>Acts</i>, 154-55; F. F. Bruce, <i>The Acts of the Apostles: The Greek Text with Introduction and Commentary</i>, 129-30; BDAG 290 s.v. <span class="greek">εἰς</span> 4.f.</p></p>
<p id="n4400285"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400285">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the genitive <span class="greek">τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος</span> (<span class="translit">tou hagiou pneumatos</span>) is a genitive of apposition; the gift consists of the Holy Spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n4400286"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400286">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The promise</i> refers to the <i>promise of the Holy Spirit</i> that Jesus received from the Father in 2:33 and which he now pours out on others. The <i>promise</i> consists of <i>the Holy Spirit</i> (see note in 2:33). Jesus is the active mediator of God’s blessing.</p></p>
<p id="n4400287"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400287">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “warned.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400288"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400288">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “crooked” (in a moral or ethical sense). See Luke 3:5.</p></p>
<p id="n4400289"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400289">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who acknowledged the truth of.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400290"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400290">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “word.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400291"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400291">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “souls” (here an idiom for the whole person).</p></p>
<p id="n4400292"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400292">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “were won over.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400293"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400293">93</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Fellowship</i> refers here to close association involving mutual involvement and relationships.</p></p>
<p id="n4400294"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400294">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “prayers.” This word was translated as a collective singular in keeping with English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400295"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400295">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Fear.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400296"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400296">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on every soul” (here “soul” is an idiom for the whole person).</p></p>
<p id="n4400297"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400297">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> In this context the miraculous nature of these signs is implied. Cf. BDAG 920 s.v. <span class="greek">σημεῖον</span> 2.a.</p></p>
<p id="n4400298"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400298">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “had.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400299"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n4400299">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb has been translated as an ingressive (“began…”). Since in context this is a description of the beginning of the community of believers, it is more likely that these statements refer to the start of various activities and practices that the early church continued for some time.</p></p>
<p id="n44002100"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n44002100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> It is possible that the first term for property (<span class="greek">κτήματα</span>, <span class="translit">ktēmata</span>) refers to real estate (as later usage seems to indicate) while the second term (<span class="greek">ὑπάρξεις</span>, <span class="translit">huparxeis</span>) refers to possessions in general, but it may also be that the two terms are used together for emphasis, simply indicating that all kinds of possessions were being sold. However, if the first term is more specifically a reference to real estate, it foreshadows the incident with Ananias and Sapphira in Acts 5:1-11.</p></p>
<p id="n44002101"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n44002101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “distributing them” (<span class="greek">αὐτά</span>, <span class="translit">auta</span>). The referent (the proceeds of the sales) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44002102"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n44002102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 437 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡμέρα</span> 2.c has “<i>every day</i>” for this phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n44002103"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n44002103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the temple.” This is actually a reference to the courts surrounding the temple proper, and has been translated accordingly.</p></p>
<p id="n44002104"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n44002104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">κατά</span> (<span class="translit">kata</span>) is used as a distributive (BDAG 512 s.v. B.1.d).</p></p>
<p id="n44002105"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n44002105">105</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>glad</i> (<i>Grk</i> “gladness”) often refers to joy brought about by God’s saving acts (Luke 1:14, 44; also the related verb in 1:47; 10:21). </p></p>
<p id="n44002106"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n44002106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with gladness and humbleness of hearts.” It is best to understand <span class="greek">καρδίας</span> (<span class="translit">kardias</span>) as an attributed genitive, with the two nouns it modifies actually listing attributes of the genitive noun which is related to them.</p></p>
<p id="n44002107"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n44002107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the favor.”</p></p>
<p id="n44002108"><a href="file1064.xhtml#n44002108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 437 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡμέρα</span> 2.c has “<i>every day</i>” for this phrase.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
