<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Peter 3</h2>
<p id="n600031"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n600031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that…they may be won over,” showing the purpose of “being subject” (vs. 1b). Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n600032"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n600032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the wives’ behavior.”</p></p>
<p id="n600033"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n600033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behavior,” the same word translated “the way you live” in vs. 1.</p></p>
<p id="n600034"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n600034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whose,” referring to the wives.</p></p>
<p id="n600035"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n600035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “adornment.”</p></p>
<p id="n600036"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n600036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “jewelry” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate that gold ornaments or jewelry is intended; otherwise the reader might assume wearing gold-colored clothing was forbidden.</p></p>
<p id="n600037"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n600037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the hidden man.” KJV’s “the hidden man of the heart,” referring to a wife, could be seriously misunderstood by the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n600038"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n600038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as Sarah obeyed.”</p></p>
<p id="n600039"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n600039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whose children you become.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000310"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “doing good and not fearing any intimidation.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000311"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “living together according to knowledge, as to the weaker, female vessel.” The primary verbal ideas of v. 7 are contained in participles (“living together…showing honor”) but they continue the sense of command from the previous paragraphs.</p></p>
<p id="n6000312"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that your prayers may not be hindered.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek, this clause was translated as a separate sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n6000313"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is no main verb in this verse (<i>Grk</i> “Finally, all [ ] harmonious”), but it continues the sense of command from the previous paragraphs.</p></p>
<p id="n6000314"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not returning…but blessing,” continuing the sense of command from the preceding.</p></p>
<p id="n6000315"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The direct object “others” is omitted but implied in Greek, and must be supplied to suit English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6000316"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “stop.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000317"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verbs are implied but not expressed in this verse: “the Lord’s eyes [ ] on the righteous and his ears [ ] to their prayer, but his face [ ] against those who do evil.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000318"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000318">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> Verses 10-12 are a quotation from Ps 34:12-16.</p></p>
<p id="n6000319"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “For” to indicate that what follows gives an explanation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000320"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000320">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek construction here implies that such suffering was not the norm, even though it could happen, and in fact may well have happened to some of the readers (cf. 4:4, 12-19).</p></p>
<p id="n6000321"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because of righteousness.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000322"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do not fear their fear,” referring to those who cause their suffering. The phrase “their fear” may mean “what they fear” (subjective genitive), but in a situation of persecution it more likely means “fear of them” (objective genitive).</p></p>
<p id="n6000323"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000323">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 8:12.</p></p>
<p id="n6000324"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000324">24</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most later <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, including some significant ones (P 5 81 436 442 1735 2344 2492 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have <span class="greek">θεόν</span> (<span class="translit">theon</span>, “God”) instead of <span class="greek">Χριστόν</span> (<span class="translit">Christon</span>; “Christ”) here. But <span class="greek">Χριστόν</span> is widely supported by excellent and early witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1243 1611 1739 1852 latt sy co), and as a less common idiom better explains the rise of the other reading.</p></p>
<p id="n6000325"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sanctify Christ as Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000326"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the hope in you.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000327"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but with courtesy and respect,” continuing the command of v. 15. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000328"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000328">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “when you are spoken against.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000329"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000329">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if the will of God should will it.” As in 3:14 the Greek construction here implies that suffering for doing good was not what God normally willed, even though it could happen, and in fact may have happened to some of the readers (cf. 4:4, 12-19).</p></p>
<p id="n6000330"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000330">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> This passage has been typeset as poetry because many scholars regard this passage as poetic or hymnic. These terms are used broadly to refer to the genre of writing, not to the content. There are two broad criteria for determining if a passage is poetic or hymnic: “(a) <i>stylistic:</i> a certain rhythmical lilt when the passages are read aloud, the presence of <i>parallelismus membrorum</i> (i.e., an arrangement into couplets), the semblance of some metre, and the presence of rhetorical devices such as alliteration, <i>chiasmus</i>, and antithesis; and (b) <i>linguistic:</i> an unusual vocabulary, particularly the presence of theological terms, which is different from the surrounding context” (P. T. O’Brien, <i>Philippians</i> [NIGTC], 188-89). Classifying a passage as hymnic or poetic is important because understanding this genre can provide keys to interpretation. However, not all scholars agree that the above criteria are present in this passage, so the decision to typeset it as poetry should be viewed as a tentative decision about its genre.</p></p>
<p id="n6000331"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000331">31</a> <p><b>tc</b> The variants here are legion (B. M. Metzger produces eight variants in a nice layout of the evidence [<i>TCGNT</i> 622]). Most of these variants involve pronouns, prepositions, or word order changes, but the major problem involves whether Christ “suffered” (<span class="greek">ἔπαθεν</span>, <span class="translit">epathen</span>) or “died” (<span class="greek">ἀπέθανεν</span>, <span class="translit">apethanen</span>). The witnesses that read <span class="greek">ἀπέθανεν</span> are <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*<sup>,2</sup> A C<sup>vid</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0285 5 436 442 614 630 945 1175 1241 1243 1505 1611 1735 1739 1852 2344; the witnesses that read <span class="greek">ἔπαθεν</span> are B L P 81 2492 <span class="apparatus">M</span>. Although the external evidence slightly favors <span class="greek">ἀπέθανεν</span>, such may be a secondary reading. Intrinsically, <span class="greek">ἔπαθεν</span> both fits the context better, especially the verbal link between v. 17 and v. 18 (note in particular the introductory causal <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> [<span class="translit">hoti</span>, “because”] and the emphatic <span class="greek">καί</span> [<span class="translit">kai</span>, “also”]), and fits the author’s style (1 Peter never uses <span class="greek">ἀποθνῄσκω</span> [<span class="translit">apothnēskō</span>], but uses <span class="greek">πάσχω</span> [<span class="translit">paschō</span>] 11 other times, more than any other NT book). However, scribes would most likely realize this, and might conform the verb in v. 18 to the author’s typical usage. It may be argued, however, that scribes tended to alter the text in light of more common NT idioms, and did not have as much sensitivity to the literary features in the immediate context. In this instance, it may not be insignificant that the NT collocates <span class="greek">ἀποθνῄσκω</span> with <span class="greek">ἁμαρτία</span> (<span class="translit">hamartia</span>, “sin”) seven other times, though only once (1 Cor 15:3) with a meaning similar to what would be demanded here, but collocates <span class="greek">πάσχω</span> with <span class="greek">ἁμαρτία</span> in only one other place, 1 Pet 4:1, where the meaning also detours from what is seen here. All in all, a decision is difficult, but <span class="greek">ἔπαθεν</span> is to be preferred slightly.</p></p>
<p id="n6000332"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000332">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> The reference to the just suffering for the unjust is an allusion to Isa 53:11-12.</p></p>
<p id="n6000333"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000333">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Greek emphasizes the contrast between these two phrases more than can be easily expressed in English.</p></p>
<p id="n6000334"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000334">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Put to death in the flesh…made alive in the spirit</i>. The contrast of <i>flesh</i> and <i>spirit</i> is not between two parts of Christ’s person (material versus immaterial) but between two broader modes of existence: the realm of unregenerate earthly life versus eternal heavenly life. The reference may not be to the Holy Spirit directly, but indirectly, since the Spirit permeates and characterizes the spiritual mode of existence. However, <i>ExSyn</i> 343 (n. 76) states “It is often objected that the Holy Spirit cannot be in view because the two datives of v 18 (<span class="greek">σαρκί</span>, <span class="greek">πνεύματι</span> [<span class="translit">sarki</span>, <span class="translit">pneumati</span>]) would then have a different syntactical force (sphere, means). But if 1 Pet 3:18 is a hymnic or liturgical fragment, this can be no objection because of ‘poetic license’: poetry is replete with examples of grammatical and lexical license, not the least of which is the use of the same morpho-syntactic categories, in parallel lines, with entirely different senses (note, e.g., the dat. expressions in 1 Tim 3:16).”</p></p>
<p id="n6000335"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000335">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which.” <i>ExSyn</i> 343 notes: “The antecedent of the RP [relative pronoun] is by no means certain. Some take it to refer to <span class="greek">πνεύματι</span> immediately preceding, the meaning of which might be either the Holy Spirit or the spiritual state. Others see the phrase as causal (‘for which reason,’ ‘because of this’), referring back to the entire clause, while still other scholars read the phrase as temporal (if so, it could be with or without an antecedent: ‘on which occasion’ or ‘meanwhile’). None of these options is excluded by syntax. It may be significant, however, that every other time <span class="greek">ἐν ᾧ</span> is used in 1 Peter it bears an adverbial/conjunctive force (cf. 1:6; 2:12; 3:16 [here, temporal]; 4:4).” Also, because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000336"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000336">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>And preached to the spirits in prison</i>. The meaning of this preaching and the <i>spirits</i> to whom he preached are much debated. It is commonly understood to be: (1) Christ’s announcement of his victory over evil to the fallen angels who await judgment for their role in leading the Noahic generation into sin; this proclamation occurred sometime between Christ’s death and ascension; or (2) Christ’s preaching of repentance through Noah to the unrighteous humans, now dead and confined in hell, who lived in the days of Noah. The latter is preferred because of the temporal indications in v. 20a and the wider argument of the book. These verses encourage Christians to stand for righteousness and try to influence their contemporaries for the gospel in spite of the suffering that may come to them. All who identify with them and their Savior will be saved from the coming judgment, just as in Noah’s day.</p></p>
<p id="n6000337"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000337">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> This reflects a Greek participle, literally “having been disobedient formerly,” that refers to the “spirits” in v. 19. Many translations take this as adjectival describing the spirits (“who had once been disobedient”; cf. NASB, NIV, NKJV, NLT, NRSV, TEV), but the grammatical construction strongly favors an adverbial interpretation describing the time of the preaching, as reflected above.</p></p>
<p id="n6000338"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000338">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the patience of God waited.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000339"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000339">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which,” referring to the ark; the referent (the ark) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000340"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000340">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which also, [as] an antitype, now saves you, [that is] baptism.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000341"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000341">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the removal of the dirt of the flesh,” where flesh refers to the physical make-up of the body with no moral connotations. </p></p>
<p id="n6000342"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000342">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “response”; “answer.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000343"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000343">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who is at the right hand…having gone into heaven.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000344"><a href="file1214.xhtml#n6000344">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “angels…having been subjected to him.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
