<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Hebrews 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Arrangement and Ritual of the Earthly Sanctuary</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:1</span> Now the first covenant,<sup><a id="n580091" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n580091">1</a></sup> in fact, had regulations for worship and its earthly sanctuary. <span class="verse">9:2</span> For a tent was prepared, the outer one,<sup><a id="n580092" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n580092">2</a></sup> which contained<sup><a id="n580093" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n580093">3</a></sup> the lampstand, the table, and the presentation of the loaves; this<sup><a id="n580094" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n580094">4</a></sup> is called the Holy Place. <span class="verse">9:3</span> And after the second curtain there was a tent called the holy of holies. <span class="verse">9:4</span> It contained the golden altar of incense and the ark of the covenant covered entirely with gold. In this ark<sup><a id="n580095" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n580095">5</a></sup> were the golden urn containing the manna, Aaron’s rod that budded, and the stone tablets of the covenant. <span class="verse">9:5</span> And above the ark<sup><a id="n580096" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n580096">6</a></sup> were the cherubim<sup><a id="n580097" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n580097">7</a></sup> of glory overshadowing the mercy seat. Now is not the time to speak of these things in detail. <span class="verse">9:6</span> So with these things prepared like this, the priests enter continually into the outer tent<sup><a id="n580098" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n580098">8</a></sup> as they perform their duties. <span class="verse">9:7</span> But only the high priest enters once a year into the inner tent,<sup><a id="n580099" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n580099">9</a></sup> and not without blood that he offers for himself and for the sins of the people committed in ignorance.<sup><a id="n5800910" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800910">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:8</span> The Holy Spirit is making clear that the way into the Holy Place had not yet appeared as long as the old tabernacle<sup><a id="n5800911" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800911">11</a></sup> was standing. <span class="verse">9:9</span> This was a symbol for the time then present, when gifts and sacrifices were offered that could not perfect the conscience of the worshiper. <span class="verse">9:10</span> They served only for matters of food and drink<sup><a id="n5800912" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800912">12</a></sup> and various ritual washings; they are external regulations<sup><a id="n5800913" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800913">13</a></sup> imposed until the new order came.<sup><a id="n5800914" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800914">14</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Christ’s Service in the Heavenly Sanctuary</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:11</span> But now Christ has come<sup><a id="n5800915" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800915">15</a></sup> as the high priest of the good things to come. He passed through the greater and more perfect tent not made with hands, that is, not of this creation, <span class="verse">9:12</span> and he entered once for all into the Most Holy Place not by the blood of goats and calves but by his own blood, and so he himself secured<sup><a id="n5800916" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800916">16</a></sup> eternal redemption. <span class="verse">9:13</span> For if the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a young cow sprinkled on those who are defiled consecrated them and provided ritual purity,<sup><a id="n5800917" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800917">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:14</span> how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify our<sup><a id="n5800918" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800918">18</a></sup> consciences from dead works to worship the living God. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:15</span> And so he is the mediator<sup><a id="n5800919" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800919">19</a></sup> of a new covenant, so that those who are called may receive the eternal inheritance he has promised,<sup><a id="n5800920" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800920">20</a></sup> since he died<sup><a id="n5800921" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800921">21</a></sup> to set them free from the violations committed under the first covenant. <span class="verse">9:16</span> For where there is a will, the death of the one who made it must be proven.<sup><a id="n5800922" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800922">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:17</span> For a will takes effect only at death, since it carries no force while the one who made it is alive. <span class="verse">9:18</span> So even the first covenant was inaugurated with blood.<sup><a id="n5800923" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800923">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:19</span> For when Moses had spoken every command to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and goats with water and scarlet wool and hyssop and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people, <span class="verse">9:20</span> and said, “<b><i>This is the blood of the covenant that God has commanded you to keep</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n5800924" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800924">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:21</span> And both the tabernacle and all the utensils of worship he likewise sprinkled with blood. <span class="verse">9:22</span> Indeed according to the law almost everything was purified with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness. <span class="verse">9:23</span> So it was necessary for the sketches<sup><a id="n5800925" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800925">25</a></sup> of the things in heaven to be purified with these sacrifices,<sup><a id="n5800926" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800926">26</a></sup> but the heavenly things themselves required<sup><a id="n5800927" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800927">27</a></sup> better sacrifices than these. <span class="verse">9:24</span> For Christ did not enter a sanctuary made with hands—the representation<sup><a id="n5800928" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800928">28</a></sup> of the true sanctuary<sup><a id="n5800929" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800929">29</a></sup> —but into heaven itself, and he appears now in God’s presence for us. <span class="verse">9:25</span> And he did not enter to offer<sup><a id="n5800930" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800930">30</a></sup> himself again and again, the way the high priest enters the sanctuary year after year with blood that is not his own, <span class="verse">9:26</span> for then he would have had to suffer again and again since the foundation of the world. But now he has appeared once for all at the consummation of the ages to put away sin by his sacrifice. <span class="verse">9:27</span> And just as people<sup><a id="n5800931" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800931">31</a></sup> are appointed to die once, and then to face judgment,<sup><a id="n5800932" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800932">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:28</span> so also, after Christ was offered once to <i>bear</i> <i>the sins of many</i>,<sup><a id="n5800933" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800933">33</a></sup> to those who eagerly await him he will appear a second time, not to bear sin<sup><a id="n5800934" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800934">34</a></sup> but to bring salvation.<sup><a id="n5800935" href="file1200_notes.xhtml#n5800935">35</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>