<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Corinthians 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Corinthians<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Church Discipline</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> It is actually reported that sexual immorality exists among you, the kind of immorality that is not permitted even among the Gentiles, so that someone is cohabiting with<sup><a id="n460051" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n460051">1</a></sup> his father’s wife. <span class="verse">5:2</span> And you are proud!<sup><a id="n460052" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n460052">2</a></sup> Shouldn’t you have been deeply sorrowful instead and removed the one who did this<sup><a id="n460053" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n460053">3</a></sup> from among you? <span class="verse">5:3</span> For even though I am absent physically,<sup><a id="n460054" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n460054">4</a></sup> I am present in spirit. And I have already judged the one who did this, just as though I were present.<sup><a id="n460055" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n460055">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:4</span> When you gather together in the name of our Lord Jesus,<sup><a id="n460056" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n460056">6</a></sup> and I am with you in spirit,<sup><a id="n460057" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n460057">7</a></sup> along with the power of our Lord Jesus, <span class="verse">5:5</span> hand this man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved<sup><a id="n460058" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n460058">8</a></sup> in the day of the Lord.<sup><a id="n460059" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n460059">9</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:6</span> Your boasting is not good. Don’t you know that a little yeast<sup><a id="n4600510" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n4600510">10</a></sup> affects<sup><a id="n4600511" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n4600511">11</a></sup> the whole batch of dough? <span class="verse">5:7</span> Clean out the old yeast so that you may be a new batch of dough—you are, in fact, without yeast. For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed. <span class="verse">5:8</span> So then, let us celebrate the festival, not with the old yeast, the yeast of vice and evil, but with the bread without yeast, the bread of sincerity and truth.<sup><a id="n4600512" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n4600512">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:9</span> I wrote you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral people. <span class="verse">5:10</span> In no way did I mean the immoral people of this world, or the greedy and swindlers and idolaters, since you would then have to go out of the world. <span class="verse">5:11</span> But now I am writing to you not to associate with anyone who calls himself a Christian<sup><a id="n4600513" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n4600513">13</a></sup> who is sexually immoral, or greedy, or an idolater, or verbally abusive,<sup><a id="n4600514" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n4600514">14</a></sup> or a drunkard, or a swindler. Do not even eat with such a person. <span class="verse">5:12</span> For what do I have to do with judging those outside? Are you not to judge those inside? <span class="verse">5:13</span> But God will judge those outside. <i>Remove</i> <i>the evil person from among you</i>.<sup><a id="n4600515" href="file1113_notes.xhtml#n4600515">15</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>