<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Peter 2</h2>
<p id="n600021"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n600021">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “put away.”</p></p>
<p id="n600022"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n600022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here “And” has been supplied in the translation to show clearly the connection between vv. 1 and 2.</p></p>
<p id="n600023"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n600023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “getting rid of…yearn for.”</p></p>
<p id="n600024"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n600024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word for spiritual in Greek is <span class="greek">λογικός</span> (<span class="translit">logikos</span>), which is a play on words with the reference in 1:23-25 to the living and enduring word (<span class="greek">λόγος</span>, <span class="translit">logos</span>) of God, through which they were born anew. This is a subtle indication that the nourishment for their growth must be the word of God.</p></p>
<p id="n600025"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n600025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in, in regard to.” But the focus of “salvation” here, as in 1:5, 9, is the future deliverance of these who have been born anew and protected by God’s power. </p></p>
<p id="n600026"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n600026">6</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Byzantine text lacks <span class="greek">εἰς σωτηρίαν</span> (<span class="translit">eis sōtērian</span>, “to salvation”), while the words are found in the earliest and best witnesses, along with others (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C K P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 81 630 1241 1505 1739 <i>al</i> latt sy co). Not only is the longer reading superior externally, but since the notion of growing up [in]to salvation may have seemed theologically objectionable, it is easy to see why some scribes would omit it.</p></p>
<p id="n600027"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n600027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have tasted that the Lord is kind.”</p></p>
<p id="n600028"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n600028">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 34:8.</p></p>
<p id="n600029"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n600029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to whom coming…you are built up…” as a continuation of the reference to the Lord in v. 3.</p></p>
<p id="n6000210"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Greek emphasizes the contrast between these two phrases more than can be easily expressed in English.</p></p>
<p id="n6000211"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “chosen, precious.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000212"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “unto a holy priesthood to offer.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000213"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it contains,” “it stands.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000214"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “chosen, precious.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000215"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one who believes.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000216"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> either “in him” or “in it,” but the OT and NT uses personify the stone as the King, the Messiah whom God will establish in Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n6000217"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The negative (<span class="greek">οὐ μή</span>, <span class="translit">ou mē</span>) is emphatic: “will certainly not.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000218"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000218">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 28:16.</p></p>
<p id="n6000219"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to you who believe is the value,” referring to their perception of the stone in contrast to those who reject (vv. 7b-8). But the expression may also be translated as “to you who believe is this honor,” referring to the lack of shame cited in v. 6b.</p></p>
<p id="n6000220"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the value” or “the honor,” but the former is preferred since it comes from the same root as “priceless” in vv. 4, 6, and it is in contrast to the negative estimate of the stone by those who reject (vv. 7b-8).</p></p>
<p id="n6000221"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the head of the corner.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000222"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000222">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 118:22 (cf. Matt 21:42; Mark 12:10; Luke 20:17; Acts 4:11).</p></p>
<p id="n6000223"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense.” The latter phrase uses the term <span class="greek">σκάνδαλον</span> (<span class="translit">skandalon</span>), denoting an obstacle to faith, something that arouses anger and rejection.</p></p>
<p id="n6000224"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000224">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 8:14.</p></p>
<p id="n6000225"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who stumble,” referring to “those who do not believe” in vs. 7. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000226"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to which they were also destined.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000227"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000227">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> This verse contains various allusions and quotations from Exod 19:5-6; 23:22 (LXX); Isa 43:20-21; and Mal 3:17.</p></p>
<p id="n6000228"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who,” continuing the description of the readers from vs. 9. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000229"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000229">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> The quotations in v. 10 are from Hos 1:6, 9; 2:23.</p></p>
<p id="n6000230"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “keeping your conduct good.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000231"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Gentiles,” used here of those who are not God’s people.</p></p>
<p id="n6000232"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in order that in what they malign you.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000233"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “when he visits.” <i>Grk</i> “in the day of visitation,” denoting a time when God intervenes directly in human affairs, either for blessing (Luke 1:68, 78; 7:16; 19:44) or for judgment (Isa 10:3; Jer 6:15). This phrase may be a quotation from Isa 10:3, in which case judgment is in view here. But blessing seems to be the point, since part of the motive for good behavior is winning the non-Christian over to the faith (as in 3:1; also apparently in 3:15; cf. Matt 5:16).</p></p>
<p id="n6000234"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “every human being”; <i>Grk</i> “every human creation,” denoting either everything created for mankind (NRSV mg: “every institution ordained for human beings”) or every creature who is human. The meaning of the verb “be subject” and the following context supports the rendering adopted in the text.</p></p>
<p id="n6000235"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those sent by him.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000236"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the punishment…and the praise.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000237"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because thus it is God’s will.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000238"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is no main verb in this verse, but it continues the sense of command from v. 13, “be subject…, as free people…not using…but as slaves of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000239"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “servants” or “bondservants.” Though <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) is normally translated “servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. Also, many slaves in the Roman world became slaves through Rome’s subjugation of conquered nations, kidnapping, or by being born into slave households. </p><p><b>sn</b> Undoubtedly the background for the concept of being the Lord’s slave or servant is to be found in the Old Testament scriptures. For a Jew this concept did not connote drudgery, but honor and privilege. It was used of national Israel at times (Isa 43:10), but was especially associated with famous OT personalities, including such great men as Moses (Josh 14:7), David (Ps 89:3; cf. 2 Sam 7:5, 8) and Elijah (2 Kgs 10:10); all these men were “servants (or slaves) of the Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000240"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000240">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “love the brotherhood.” The Greek term “brotherhood” is used in a broad sense to connote familial relationships within the family of God. BDAG 19 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφότης</span> 1 suggests “a fellowship,” but in the present context “love the fellowship of believers” could be taken to mean “love to participate in fellowship with believers,” whereas the present verse suggests the Christian community as a whole, in familial terms, is in view. This same word occurs in 5:9; there it has been translated “brothers and sisters.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000241"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here is <span class="greek">οἰκέτης</span> (<span class="translit">oiketēs</span>), often used of a servant in a household (who would have been a slave).</p></p>
<p id="n6000242"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “being subject,” but continuing the sense of command from vs. 13.</p></p>
<p id="n6000243"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For this [is] favor/grace,” used as a metonymy of that which pleases him, which he looks on with favor (cf. BDAG 1079 s.v. <span class="greek">χάρις</span> 2). Cf. 1 Pet 2:20.</p></p>
<p id="n6000244"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000244">44</a> <p><b>tc</b> The expression “consciousness/conscience of God” (<span class="greek">συνείδησιν θεοῦ</span>; <span class="translit">suneidēsin theou</span>) is unusual, occurring only here in the NT. Because <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> was liable to misinterpretation, several witnesses altered the text, either replacing it with <span class="greek">ἀγαθήν</span> (<span class="translit">agathēn</span>; C <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 323 442 614 630 945 1175 1241 1243 1505 1611 1739 1852 2492 sy) or expanding the expression by adding <span class="greek">ἀγαθήν</span> before <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> [A* 33 2344] 81). Replacing <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> with <span class="greek">ἀγαθήν</span> conforms to other NT phrases, notably in this same letter (Acts 23:1; 1 Tim 1:5, 19; 1 Pet 3:16, 21), suggesting that such a reading is motivated. The reading <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span>, however, has superior support (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A<sup>c</sup> B P 049 5 436 1735 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat co), and best explains the rise of the others.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “conscious(ness) of God,” an awareness of God and allegiance to him.</p></p>
<p id="n6000245"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For this [is] favor/grace with God,” used as a metonymy as in vs. 19 of that which pleases him, which he looks on with favor (cf. BDAG 1079 s.v. <span class="greek">χάρις</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n6000246"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who,” referring to Christ and applying the quotations from Isa 53 to him. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000247"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000247">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 53:9.</p></p>
<p id="n6000248"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who being maligned,” continuing the reference to Christ. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000249"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000249">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he did not threaten, but.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000250"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000250">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 53:7.</p></p>
<p id="n6000251"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the one”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6000252"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000252">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000253"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000253">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 53:4, 12.</p></p>
<p id="n6000254"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000254">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἀπογίνομαι</span> (<span class="translit">apoginomai</span>) occurs only here in the NT. It can have a literal meaning (“to die”; L&amp;N 74.27) and a figurative meaning (“to cease”; L&amp;N 68.40). Because it is opposite the verb <span class="greek">ζάω</span> (<span class="translit">zaō</span>, “to live”), many argue that the meaning of the verb here must be “die” (so BDAG 108 s.v.), but even so literal death would not be in view. “In place of <span class="greek">ἀποθνῃσκιεν</span>, the common verb for ‘die,’ <span class="greek">ἀπογινεθαι</span> serves Peter as a euphemism, with the meaning ‘to be away’ or ‘to depart’” (J. R. Michaels, <i>1 Peter</i> [WBC 49], 148). It is a metaphorical way to refer to the decisive separation from sin Jesus accomplished for believers through his death; the result is that believers “may cease from sinning.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000255"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000255">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whose.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6000256"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000256">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> the singular: “wound”; “injury.”</p></p>
<p id="n6000257"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000257">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 53:5.</p></p>
<p id="n6000258"><a href="file1213.xhtml#n6000258">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 53:6.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
