<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 6</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 6</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Believer’s Freedom from Sin’s Domination</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:1</span> What shall we say then? Are we to remain in sin so that grace may increase? <span class="verse">6:2</span> Absolutely not! How can we who died to sin still live in it? <span class="verse">6:3</span> Or do you not know that as many as were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? <span class="verse">6:4</span> Therefore we have been buried with him through baptism into death, in order that just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we too may live a new life.<sup><a id="n450061" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n450061">1</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:5</span> For if we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we will certainly also be united in the likeness of his resurrection.<sup><a id="n450062" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n450062">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:6</span> We know that<sup><a id="n450063" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n450063">3</a></sup> our old man was crucified with him so that the body of sin would no longer dominate us,<sup><a id="n450064" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n450064">4</a></sup> so that we would no longer be enslaved to sin. <span class="verse">6:7</span> (For someone who has died has been freed from sin.)<sup><a id="n450065" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n450065">5</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:8</span> Now if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him. <span class="verse">6:9</span> We know<sup><a id="n450066" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n450066">6</a></sup> that since Christ has been raised from the dead, he is never going to die<sup><a id="n450067" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n450067">7</a></sup> again; death no longer has mastery over him. <span class="verse">6:10</span> For the death he died, he died to sin once for all, but the life he lives, he lives to God. <span class="verse">6:11</span> So you too consider yourselves<sup><a id="n450068" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n450068">8</a></sup> dead to sin, but<sup><a id="n450069" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n450069">9</a></sup> alive to God in Christ Jesus. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:12</span> Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its desires, <span class="verse">6:13</span> and do not present your members to sin as instruments<sup><a id="n4500610" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500610">10</a></sup> to be used for unrighteousness,<sup><a id="n4500611" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500611">11</a></sup> but present yourselves to God as those who are alive from the dead and your members to God as instruments<sup><a id="n4500612" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500612">12</a></sup> to be used for righteousness. <span class="verse">6:14</span> For sin will have no mastery over you, because you are not under law but under grace. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Believer’s Enslavement to God’s Righteousness</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:15</span> What then? Shall we sin because we are not under law but under grace? Absolutely not! <span class="verse">6:16</span> Do you not know that if you present yourselves<sup><a id="n4500613" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500613">13</a></sup> as obedient slaves,<sup><a id="n4500614" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500614">14</a></sup> you are slaves of the one you obey, either of sin resulting in death, or obedience resulting in righteousness?<sup><a id="n4500615" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500615">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">6:17</span> But thanks be to God that though you were slaves to sin, you obeyed<sup><a id="n4500616" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500616">16</a></sup> from the heart that pattern<sup><a id="n4500617" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500617">17</a></sup> of teaching you were entrusted to, <span class="verse">6:18</span> and having been freed from sin, you became enslaved to righteousness. <span class="verse">6:19</span> (I am speaking in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh.)<sup><a id="n4500618" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500618">18</a></sup> For just as you once presented your members as slaves to impurity and lawlessness leading to more lawlessness, so now present your members as slaves to righteousness leading to sanctification. <span class="verse">6:20</span> For when you were slaves of sin, you were free with regard to righteousness. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">6:21</span> So what benefit<sup><a id="n4500619" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500619">19</a></sup> did you then reap<sup><a id="n4500620" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500620">20</a></sup> from those things that you are now ashamed of? For the end of those things is death. <span class="verse">6:22</span> But now, freed<sup><a id="n4500621" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500621">21</a></sup> from sin and enslaved to God, you have your benefit<sup><a id="n4500622" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500622">22</a></sup> leading to sanctification, and the end is eternal life. <span class="verse">6:23</span> For the payoff<sup><a id="n4500623" href="file1097_notes.xhtml#n4500623">23</a></sup> of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord. </p>

</body>
</html>