<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 19</h2>
<p id="n440191"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n440191">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened that while.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n440193"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n440193">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “interior.”</p></p>
<p id="n440194"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n440194">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 92 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνωτερικός</span> has “<i>upper</i> <span class="greek">τὰ ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> μέρη</span> <i>the upper</i> (i.e., <i>inland</i>) <i>country, the interior</i> Ac 19:1.”</p></p>
<p id="n440196"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n440196">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and found.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence and the sequencing with the following verse the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun.</p></p>
<p id="n440197"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n440197">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “there” is not in the Greek text but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n440198"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n440198">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">πιστεύσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">pisteusantes</span>) is taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n440199"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n440199">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they [said] to him” (the word “said” is implied in the Greek text).</p></p>
<p id="n4401910"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> This use of <span class="greek">ἀλλά</span> (<span class="translit">alla</span>) is ascensive and involves an ellipsis (BDAG 45 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀλλά</span> 3): “No, [not only did we not receive the Spirit,] but also we have not heard that there is a Holy Spirit.” However, this is lengthy and somewhat awkward in English, and the ascensive meaning can be much more easily represented by including the word “even” after the negation. Apparently these disciples were unaware of the provision of the Spirit that is represented in baptism. The language sounds like they did not know about a Holy Spirit, but this seems to be only linguistic shorthand for not knowing about the Spirit’s presence (Luke 3:15-18). The situation is parallel to that of Apollos. Apollos and these disciples represent those who “complete” their transition to messianic faith as Jews.</p></p>
<p id="n4401911"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401911">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401912"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401912">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401913"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401913">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> These disciples may have had their contact with John early on in the Baptist’s ministry before Jesus had emerged. This is the fifth time Luke links John the Baptist and Jesus (Acts 1:5; 11:16; 13:25; 18:25).</p></p>
<p id="n4401914"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401914">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “laid.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401915"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401915">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> The coming of the <i>Holy Spirit</i> here is another case where the Spirit comes and prophecy results in Acts (see Acts 2). Paul’s action parallels that of Peter (Acts 8) and not just with Gentiles.</p></p>
<p id="n4401916"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401916">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐλάλουν</span> (<span class="translit">elaloun</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4401917"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐπροφήτευον</span> (<span class="translit">eprophēteuon</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4401918"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401918">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4401919"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401920"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401920">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So entering the synagogue, he spoke out fearlessly.” The participle <span class="greek">εἰσελθών</span> (<span class="translit">eiselthōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401921"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401921">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4401922"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401922">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “boldly.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401923"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401923">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the word <span class="greek">διελέξατο</span> (<span class="translit">dielexato</span>; from <span class="greek">διαλέγομαι</span>, <span class="translit">dialegomai</span>) is frequently translated “reasoned,” “disputed,” or “argued,” this sense comes from its classical meaning where it was used of philosophical disputation, including the Socratic method of questions and answers. However, there does not seem to be contextual evidence for this kind of debate in Acts 19:8. As G. Schrenk (<i>TDNT</i> 2:94-95) points out, “What is at issue is the address which any qualified member of a synagogue might give.” Other examples of this may be found in the NT in Matt 4:23 and Mark 1:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4401924"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401924">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “addressing them persuasively.” The two participles <span class="greek">διαλεγόμενος</span> and <span class="greek">πείθων</span> (<span class="translit">dialegomenos</span> and <span class="translit">peithōn</span>) can be understood as a hendiadys (so NIV, NRSV), thus, “addressing them persuasively.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401925"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401925">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> To talk about Jesus as the Christ who has come is to talk about <i>the kingdom of God</i>. This is yet another summary of the message like that in 18:28. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching (along with Paul’s teaching here) has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21; Acts 1:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4401926"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401926">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1105-6 s.v. <span class="greek">ὡς</span> 8.b lists this use as a temporal conjunction.</p></p>
<p id="n4401927"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401927">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “some became hardened.” See BDAG 930 s.v. <span class="greek">σκληρύνω</span> b and Acts 7:51-53.</p></p>
<p id="n4401928"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401928">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “speaking evil of.” BDAG 500 s.v. <span class="greek">κακολογέω</span> has “<i>speak evil of, revile, insult</i>…<span class="greek">τὶ</span> <i>someth</i>. <span class="greek">τὴν ὁδόν</span> <i>the Way</i> (i.e. Christian way of life) Ac 19:9.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401929"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401929">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Way</i> refers to the Christian movement (Christianity). Luke frequently refers to it as “the Way” (Acts 9:2; 18:25-26; 19:23; 22:4; 24:14, 22).</p></p>
<p id="n4401930"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401930">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “leaving them, he took.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποστάς</span> (<span class="translit">apostas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401931"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401931">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “with him” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4401932"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401932">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the word <span class="greek">διελέξατο</span> (<span class="translit">dielexato</span>; from <span class="greek">διαλέγομαι</span>, <span class="translit">dialegomai</span>) is frequently translated “reasoned,” “disputed,” or “argued,” this sense comes from its classical meaning where it was used of philosophical disputation, including the Socratic method of questions and answers. However, there does not seem to be contextual evidence for this kind of debate in Acts 19:9. As G. Schrenk (<i>TDNT</i> 2:94-95) points out, “What is at issue is the address which any qualified member of a synagogue might give.” Other examples of this may be found in the NT in Matt 4:23 and Mark 1:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4401933"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401933">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 437 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡμέρα</span> 2.c has “<i>every day</i>” for this phrase in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401934"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401934">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The “lecture hall” was a place where teachers and pupils met. The term is a NT <i>hapax legomenon</i> (BDAG 982 s.v. <span class="greek">σχολή</span>). L&amp;N 7.14 notes, “it is better to use a translation such as ‘lecture hall’ rather than ‘school,’ since one does not wish to give the impression of the typical classroom situation characteristic of present-day schools.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401935"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401935">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>all who lived in the province of Asia</i> is good Semitic hyperbole (see Col 1:7, “all the world”). The message was now available to the region.</p></p>
<p id="n4401936"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401936">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The word of the Lord</i> is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; Luke 22:61, Acts 11:16, 1 Pet 1:25) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; here and in Acts 8:25; 13:44, 48, 49; 15:35, 36; 16:32; 19:20; 1 Thess 1:8; 4:15; 2 Thess 3:1). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said.</p></p>
<p id="n4401937"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401937">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1019 s.v. <span class="greek">τυγχάνω</span> 2.d states, “<span class="greek">δυνάμεις οὐ τὰς τυχούσας</span> <i>extraordinary miracles</i> Ac 19:11.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401938"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401938">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “skin” (the outer surface of the body).</p></p>
<p id="n4401939"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401939">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “were taken.” It might be that as word went out into the region that since the sick could not come to Paul, healing was brought to them this way. The “handkerchiefs” are probably face cloths for wiping perspiration (see BDAG 934 s.v. <span class="greek">σουδάριον</span>) while the “aprons” might be material worn by workmen (BDAG 923-24 s.v. <span class="greek">σιμικίνθιον</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401940"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401940">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “of them” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4401941"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401941">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “some Jewish exorcists who traveled about.” The adjectival participle <span class="greek">περιερχομένων</span> (<span class="translit">perierchomenōn</span>) has been translated as “itinerant.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401942"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401942">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to name the name.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401943"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401943">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who had.” Here <span class="greek">ἔχω</span> (<span class="translit">echō</span>) is used of demon possession, a common usage according to BDAG 421 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔχω</span> 7.a.<span class="greek">α</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4401944"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401944">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>I sternly warn you</i> means “I charge you as under oath.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401945"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401945">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a certain Sceva.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401946"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401946">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> Within the sequence of the narrative, this amounts to a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4401947"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401947">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered and said to them.” The expression, redundant in English, has been simplified to “replied.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401948"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401948">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Jesus I know about.” Here <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦν</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsoun</span>) is in emphatic position in Greek, but placing the object first is not normal in contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401949"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401949">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 380 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπίσταμαι</span> 2 has “<i>know, be acquainted with</i> <span class="greek">τινά</span>…<span class="greek">τὸν Παῦλον</span> Ac 19:15.” Here the translation “be acquainted with” was used to differentiate from the previous phrase which has <span class="greek">γινώσκω</span> (<span class="translit">ginōskō</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401950"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401950">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>But who are you?</i> This account shows how the power of Paul was so distinct that parallel claims to access that power were denied. In fact, such manipulation, by those who did not know Jesus, was judged (v. 16). The indirect way in which the exorcists made the appeal shows their distance from Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4401951"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401951">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in whom the evil spirit was.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401952"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401952">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the man in whom the evil spirit was, jumping on them.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐφαλόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">ephalomenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. L&amp;N 15.239 has “<span class="greek">ἐφαλόμενος ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἐπ᾿ αὐτούς</span> ‘the man jumped on them’ Ac 19:16.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401953"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401953">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and beating them all into submission.” The participle <span class="greek">κατακυριεύσας</span> (<span class="translit">katakurieusas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. According to W. Foerster, <i>TDNT</i> 3:1098, the word means “the exercise of dominion against someone, i.e., to one’s own advantage.” These exorcists were shown to be powerless in comparison to Jesus who was working through Paul.</p></p>
<p id="n4401954"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401954">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 484 s.v. <span class="greek">ἰσχύω</span> 3 has “<i>win out, prevail</i>…<span class="greek">κατά τινος</span> <i>over, against someone</i> Ac 19:16.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401956"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401956">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fell on.” BDAG 377 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιπίπτω</span> 2 has “<span class="greek">φόβος ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἐπί τινα</span> <i>fear came upon someone</i>…Ac 19:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401957"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401957">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “exalted.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401958"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401958">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “came”; the word “forward” is supplied in the translation to clarify the meaning and to conform to the contemporary English idiom.</p></p>
<p id="n4401959"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401959">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “confessing and disclosing their deeds.” BDAG 59 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναγγέλλω</span> 2 has “W. <span class="greek">ἐξομολογεῖσθαι</span>:<span class="greek"> ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὰς πράξεις αὐτὸν</span> <i>make their deeds known</i> Ac 19:18.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Making their deeds known</i>. Ephesus was a major pagan religious center with much syncretistic “magical” practice. Coming to Jesus changed the lives and attitudes of these believers, creating a social impact.</p></p>
<p id="n4401960"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401960">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 472 s.v. <span class="greek">ἱκανός</span> 4.a has “<i>many</i>, <i>quite a few</i>” for <span class="greek">ἱκανοί</span> (<span class="translit">hikanoi</span>) in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401961"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401961">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term see BDAG 800 s.v. <span class="greek">περίεργος</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4401962"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401962">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “scrolls.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401963"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401963">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “burned them up publicly.” L&amp;N 14.66 has “‘they brought their books together and burned them up in the presence of everyone’ Ac 19:19.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401964"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401964">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and when.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun.</p></p>
<p id="n4401965"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401965">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “fifty thousand silver drachmas.” BDAG 128 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀργύριον</span> 2.c states, “<span class="greek">ἀργυρίου μυριάδας πέντε</span> <i>50,000</i> (Attic silver) <i>drachmas</i> Ac 19:19.” Another way to express the value would be in sheep: One drachma could buy one sheep. So this many drachmas could purchase a huge flock of sheep. A drachma also equals a denarius, or a day’s wage for the average worker. So this amount would be equal to 50,000 work days or in excess of 8,300 weeks of labor (the weeks are calculated at six working days because of the Jewish cultural context). The impact of Christianity on the Ephesian economy was considerable (note in regard to this the concerns expressed in 19:26-27).</p></p>
<p id="n4401966"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401966">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The word of the Lord</i> is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; Luke 22:61, Acts 11:16, 1 Pet 1:25) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; here and in Acts 8:25; 13:44, 48, 49; 15:35, 36; 16:32; 19:10; 1 Thess 1:8; 4:15; 2 Thess 3:1). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said.</p></p>
<p id="n4401967"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401967">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ηὔξανεν</span> (<span class="translit">ēuxanen</span>) has been translated as a progressive imperfect, as has the following verb <span class="greek">ἴσχυεν</span> (<span class="translit">ischuen</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401968"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401968">68</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The word of the Lord…to prevail</i>. Luke portrays the impact of Christianity in terms of the Lord’s transforming power in the lives of individuals.</p></p>
<p id="n4401969"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401969">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all these things had been fulfilled.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401970"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401970">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul purposed in [his] spirit” (an idiom). According to BDAG 1003 s.v. <span class="greek">τίθημι</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">ε</span> the entire idiom means “to resolve” (or “decide”): “<span class="greek">ἔθετο ὁ Παῦλος ἐν τῷ πνεύματι</span> w. inf. foll. <i>Paul resolved</i> 19:21.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401972"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401972">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Macedonia</i> was the Roman province of Macedonia in Greece.</p></p>
<p id="n4401973"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401973">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Achaia</i> was the Roman province of Achaia located across the Aegean Sea from Ephesus. Its principal city was Corinth.</p></p>
<p id="n4401974"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401974">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Achaia, saying.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence and the awkwardness in English of having two participial clauses following one another (“passing through…saying”), the participle <span class="greek">εἰπών</span> (<span class="translit">eipōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb and a new sentence begun here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4401975"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401975">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is the first time Paul mentions <i>Rome</i>. He realized the message of Christianity could impact that society even at its heights.</p></p>
<p id="n4401976"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401976">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> The aorist participle <span class="greek">ἀποστείλας</span> (<span class="translit">aposteilas</span>) has been taken temporally reflecting action antecedent to that of the main verb (<span class="greek">ἐπέσχεν</span>, <span class="translit">epeschen</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401977"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401977">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “two of those who ministered to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401978"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401978">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Macedonia</i> was the Roman province of Macedonia in Greece.</p></p>
<p id="n4401979"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401979">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n4401980"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401980">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “There happened at that time.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Instead the verb “took place” has been supplied in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4401981"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401981">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 512 s.v. <span class="greek">κατά</span> B.2.a, “in definite indications of time…Of the past: <span class="greek">κ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἐκεῖνον τὸν καιρόν</span> <i>at that time, then</i>…Ac 12:1; 19:23.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401982"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401982">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “no little disturbance” (an idiom; see BDAG 991 s.v. <span class="greek">τάραχος</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4401983"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401983">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Way</i> refers to the Christian movement (Christianity).</p></p>
<p id="n4401984"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401984">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 665 s.v. <span class="greek">ναός</span> 1.a states, “Specif. of temples: of replicas of the temple of Artemis at Ephesus 19:24…but here, near <span class="greek">ἱερόν</span> vs. 27…<span class="greek">ναός</span> can be understood in the more restricted sense <i>shrine</i>, where the image of the goddess stood.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401985"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401985">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Artemis</i> was the name of a Greek goddess worshiped particularly in Asia Minor, whose temple, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, was located just outside the city of Ephesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4401986"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401986">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brought not a little business” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4401987"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401987">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>A great deal of business</i>. The charge that Christianity brought economic and/or social upheaval was made a number of times in Acts: 16:20-21; 17:6-7; 18:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4401988"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401988">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “gathering.” The participle <span class="greek">συναθροίσας</span> (<span class="translit">sunathroisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401989"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401989">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whom”; because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) has been replaced with a pronoun (“these”) and a new sentence begun in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4401990"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401990">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Workmen in similar trades</i>. In effect, Demetrius gathered the Ephesian chamber of commerce together to hear about the threat to their prosperity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401991"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401991">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Another possible meaning is “that this business is an easy way for us to earn a living.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401992"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401992">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “persuading.” The participle <span class="greek">πείσας</span> (<span class="translit">peisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401993"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401993">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “misled.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401994"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401994">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 472 s.v. <span class="greek">ἱκανός</span> 3.a has “of pers. <span class="greek">ὄχλος</span> <i>a large crowd</i>…Ac 11:24, 26; 19:26.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401996"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401996">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; see the note on this word in v. 22.</p></p>
<p id="n4401997"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401997">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) has been regarded as indicating instrumentality.</p></p>
<p id="n4401998"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401998">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “at all” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Gods made by hands are not gods at all</i>. Paul preached against paganism’s idolatry. Here is a one-line summary of a speech like that in Acts 17:22-31.</p></p>
<p id="n4401999"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n4401999">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “come under public criticism.” BDAG 101 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπελεγμός</span> has “<i>come into disrepute</i> Ac 19:27.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019100"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019100">100</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Artemis</i> was the name of a Greek goddess worshiped particularly in Asia Minor, whose temple, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, was located just outside the city of Ephesus.</p></p>
<p id="n44019101"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 597 s.v. <span class="greek">λογίζομαι</span> 1.b has “<span class="greek">εἰς οὐθὲν λογισθῆναι</span> <i>be looked upon as nothing</i>…Ac 19:27.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019102"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; see the note on this word in v. 22.</p></p>
<p id="n44019103"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “her magnificence.” BDAG 488 s.v. <span class="greek">καθαιρέω</span> 2.b has “<span class="greek">καθαιρεῖσθαι τῆς μεγαλειότητος αὐτῆς</span> <i>suffer the loss of her magnificence</i> Ac 19:27”; L&amp;N 13.38 has “‘and to have her greatness done away with’ Ac 19:27.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Suffer the loss of her greatness</i>. It is important to appreciate that money alone was not the issue, even for the pagan Ephesians. The issue was ultimately the dishonor of their goddess to whom they were devoted in worship. The battle was a “cosmic” one between deities.</p></p>
<p id="n44019104"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n44019105"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And hearing.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀκούσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">akousantes</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n44019106"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they became filled with rage” (an idiom). The reaction of the Ephesians here is like that of the Jews earlier (Acts 7:54).</p></p>
<p id="n44019107"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and began shouting, saying.” The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἔκραζον</span> (<span class="translit">ekrazon</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect. The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n44019108"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019108">108</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Artemis</i> was a Greek goddess worshiped particularly in Asia Minor, whose temple, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, was located just outside the city of Ephesus.</p></p>
<p id="n44019109"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n44019110"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 39.43 has “‘the uproar spread throughout the whole city’ (literally ‘the city was filled with uproar’) Ac 19:29.” BDAG 954 s.v. <span class="greek">σύγχυσις</span> has “<i>confusion</i>, <i>tumult</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019111"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the crowd) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44019112"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019112">112</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To the theater</i>. This location made the event a public spectacle. The Grand Theater in Ephesus (still standing today) stood facing down the main thoroughfare of the city toward the docks. It had a seating capacity of 25,000.</p></p>
<p id="n44019113"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the theater with one accord.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019114"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “enter the crowd.” According to BDAG 223 s.v. <span class="greek">δῆμος</span> 2, “in a Hellenistic city, a convocation of citizens called together for the purpose of transacting official business, <i>popular assembly</i>…<span class="greek">εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὸν δ</span>. <i>go into the assembly</i> 19:30.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019115"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asiarchs” (high-ranking officials of the province of Asia).</p></p>
<p id="n44019116"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sending”; the participle <span class="greek">πέμψαντες</span> (<span class="translit">pempsantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44019117"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “a message” are not in the Greek text but are implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n44019118"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 242-43 s.v. <span class="greek">δίδωμι</span> 11 has “to cause (oneself) to go, <i>go, venture somewhere</i> (cp. our older ‘betake oneself’)…Ac 19:31.” The desire of these sympathetic authorities was surely to protect Paul’s life. The detail indicates how dangerous things had become.</p></p>
<p id="n44019119"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “had assembled.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019120"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Some of the crowd gave instructions to.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019121"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “it was about” are not in the Greek text but are implied; <span class="greek">᾿Αλέξανδρον</span> (<span class="translit">Alexandron</span>) is taken to be an accusative of general reference.</p></p>
<p id="n44019122"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 865 s.v. <span class="greek">προβάλλω</span> 1 has “to cause to come forward, <i>put forward</i>…<span class="greek">τινά</span> <i>someone</i>…push someone forward to speak in the theater…Ac 19:33.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019123"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “motioning.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019124"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019124">124</a> <p><b>sn</b> The nature of Alexander’s <i>defense</i> is not clear. It appears he was going to explain, as a Jew, that the problem was not caused by Jews, but by those of “the Way.” However, he never got a chance to speak.</p></p>
<p id="n44019125"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “before the crowd.” According to BDAG 223 s.v. <span class="greek">δῆμος</span> 2, “in a Hellenistic city, a convocation of citizens called together for the purpose of transacting official business, <i>popular assembly</i>…<span class="greek">ἀπολογεῖσθαι τῷ δ</span>. <i>make a defense before the assembly</i> vs. 33.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019126"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But recognizing.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιγνόντες</span> (<span class="translit">epignontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44019127"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “[they shouted] with one voice from all of them” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n44019128"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019128">128</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Artemis</i> was a Greek goddess worshiped particularly in Asia Minor, whose temple, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, was located just outside the city of Ephesus, 1.25 mi (2 km) northeast of the Grand Theater. Dimensions were 418 ft by 239 ft (125 m by 72 m) for the platform; the temple proper was 377 ft by 180 ft (113 m by 54 m). The roof was supported by 117 columns, each 60 ft (18 m) high by 6 ft (1.8 m) in diameter. The Emperor Justinian of Byzantium later took these columns for use in construction of the Hagia Sophia, where they still exist (in modern day Istanbul).</p></p>
<p id="n44019129"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019129">129</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They all shouted…for about two hours</i>. The extent of the tumult shows the racial and social tensions of a cosmopolitan city like Ephesus, indicating what the Christians in such locations had to face.</p></p>
<p id="n44019130"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “clerk.” The “scribe” (<span class="greek">γραμματεύς</span>, <span class="translit">grammateus</span>) was the keeper of the city’s records.</p></p>
<p id="n44019131"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a generic use of <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n44019132"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 670 s.v. <span class="greek">νεωκόρος</span>. The city is described as the “warden” or “guardian” of the goddess and her temple.</p></p>
<p id="n44019133"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019133">133</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Artemis</i> was a Greek goddess worshiped particularly in Asia Minor, whose temple, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, was located just outside the city of Ephesus.</p></p>
<p id="n44019134"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from the sky” (the same Greek word means both “heaven” and “sky”).</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>fell from heaven</i> adds a note of apologetic about the heavenly origin of the goddess. The city’s identity and well-being was wrapped up with this connection, in their view. Many interpreters view <i>her image that fell from heaven</i> as a stone meteorite regarded as a sacred object.</p></p>
<p id="n44019135"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019136"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive absolute construction with the participle <span class="greek">ὄντων</span> (<span class="translit">ontōn</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle. On the term translated “indisputable” see BDAG 68-69 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναντίρρητος</span> which has “<i>not to be contradicted, undeniable</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019137"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it is necessary that you be quiet.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019138"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 88.98 has “pertaining to impetuous and reckless behavior—‘reckless, impetuous.’…‘so then, you must calm down and not do anything reckless’ Ac 19:36.” The city secretary was asking that order be restored.</p></p>
<p id="n44019139"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019139">139</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “desecrators of temples.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019140"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019140">140</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Nor blasphemers of our goddess</i>. There was no formal crime with which Paul could be charged. He had the right to his religion as long as he did not act physically against the temple. Since no overt act had taken place, the official wanted the community to maintain the status quo on these religious matters. The remarks suggest Paul was innocent of any civil crime.</p></p>
<p id="n44019141"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019141">141</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 600 s.v. <span class="greek">λόγος</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">ε</span> has “<span class="greek">ἔχειν πρός τινα λόγον</span> <i>have a complaint against someone</i>…19:38.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019142"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019142">142</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 56.1 has ‘if Demetrius and his workers have an accusation against someone, the courts are open’ Ac 19:38.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019143"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019143">143</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “there” is not in the Greek text but is implied. The official’s request is that the legal system be respected.</p></p>
<p id="n44019144"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019144">144</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “anything more than this.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019145"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019145">145</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “resolved.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019146"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019146">146</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in a legal meeting of the citizens.” L&amp;N 30.81 has “<span class="greek">ἐν τῇ ἐννόμῳ ἐκκλησίᾳ ἐπιλυθήσεται</span> ‘it will have to be settled in a legal meeting of the citizens’ Ac 19:39.” This meeting took place three times a year.</p></p>
<p id="n44019147"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019147">147</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For indeed.” The ascensive force of <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) would be awkward to translate here.</p></p>
<p id="n44019148"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019148">148</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term translated “rioting” refers to a revolt or uprising (BDAG 940 s.v. <span class="greek">στάσις</span> 2, 3). This would threaten Roman rule and invite Roman intervention.</p></p>
<p id="n44019149"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019149">149</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to account for.” <i>Grk</i> “since there is no cause concerning which we can give account concerning this disorderly gathering.” The complexity of the Greek relative clause (“which”) and the multiple prepositions (“concerning”) have been simplified in the translation consistent with contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44019150"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019150">150</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “commotion.” BDAG 979 s.v. <span class="greek">συστροφή</span> 1 gives the meaning “a tumultuous gathering of people, <i>disorderly/seditious gathering</i> or <i>commotion</i>…Ac 19:40.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019151"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019151">151</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n44019152"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019152">152</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And saying.” The participle <span class="greek">εἰπών</span> (<span class="translit">eipōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44019153"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019153">153</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n44019154"><a href="file1081.xhtml#n44019154">154</a> <p><b>sn</b> Verse 41 in the English text is included as part of verse 40 in the standard critical editions of the Greek NT.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
