<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Hebrews 13</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 13</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Final Exhortations</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:1</span> Brotherly love must continue. <span class="verse">13:2</span> Do not neglect hospitality, because through it some have entertained angels without knowing it.<sup><a id="n580131" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n580131">1</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:3</span> Remember those in prison as though you were in prison with them,<sup><a id="n580132" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n580132">2</a></sup> and those ill-treated as though you too felt their torment.<sup><a id="n580133" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n580133">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:4</span> Marriage must be honored among all and the marriage bed kept undefiled, for God will judge sexually immoral people and adulterers. <span class="verse">13:5</span> Your conduct must be free from the love of money and you must be content with what you have, for he has said, “<b><i>I will never leave you and I will never abandon you</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n580134" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n580134">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:6</span> So we can say with confidence, “<i><b>The Lord is my helper, and</b></i><sup><a id="n580135" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n580135">5</a></sup> <i><b>I will not be afraid</b>. <b>What can people do to me?</b></i>”<sup><a id="n580136" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n580136">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:7</span> Remember your leaders, who spoke God’s message to you; reflect on the outcome of their lives and imitate their faith. <span class="verse">13:8</span> Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever! <span class="verse">13:9</span> Do not be carried away by all sorts of strange teachings.<sup><a id="n580137" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n580137">7</a></sup> For it is good for the heart to be strengthened by grace, not ritual meals,<sup><a id="n580138" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n580138">8</a></sup> which have never benefited those who participated in them. <span class="verse">13:10</span> We have an altar that those who serve in the tabernacle have no right to eat from. <span class="verse">13:11</span> For the bodies of those animals whose blood the high priest brings<sup><a id="n580139" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n580139">9</a></sup> into the sanctuary as an offering for sin are burned outside the camp. <span class="verse">13:12</span> Therefore, to sanctify the people by his own blood, Jesus also suffered outside the camp. <span class="verse">13:13</span> We must go out to him, then, outside the camp, bearing the abuse he experienced.<sup><a id="n5801310" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801310">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:14</span> For here we have no lasting city, but we seek the city that is to come. <span class="verse">13:15</span> Through him then let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of our lips, acknowledging his name. <span class="verse">13:16</span> And do not neglect to do good and to share what you have,<sup><a id="n5801311" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801311">11</a></sup> for God is pleased with such sacrifices. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:17</span> Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch over your souls and will give an account for their work.<sup><a id="n5801312" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801312">12</a></sup> Let them do this<sup><a id="n5801313" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801313">13</a></sup> with joy and not with complaints, for this would be no advantage for you. <span class="verse">13:18</span> Pray for us, for we are sure that we have a clear conscience and desire to conduct ourselves rightly in every respect. <span class="verse">13:19</span> I especially ask you to pray<sup><a id="n5801314" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801314">14</a></sup> that I may be restored to you very soon. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Benediction and Conclusion</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:20</span> Now may the God of peace who by the blood of the eternal covenant brought back from the dead the great shepherd of the sheep, our Lord Jesus, <span class="verse">13:21</span> equip you with every good thing to do his will, working in us<sup><a id="n5801315" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801315">15</a></sup> what is pleasing before him through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever.<sup><a id="n5801316" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801316">16</a></sup> Amen. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">13:22</span> Now I urge you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5801317" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801317">17</a></sup> bear with my message of exhortation, for in fact I have written to you briefly. <span class="verse">13:23</span> You should know that<sup><a id="n5801318" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801318">18</a></sup> our brother Timothy has been released. If he comes soon, he will be with me when I see you.<sup><a id="n5801319" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801319">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">13:24</span> Greetings to all your leaders and all the saints. Those from Italy send you greetings. <span class="verse">13:25</span> Grace be with you all.<sup><a id="n5801320" href="file1204_notes.xhtml#n5801320">20</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>