<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 18</h2>
<p id="n660181"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n660181">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “glory”; but often in the sense of splendor, brightness, or radiance (see L&amp;N 14.49).</p></p>
<p id="n660182"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n660182">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style</p></p>
<p id="n660183"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n660183">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “It” (the subject is embedded in the verb in Greek; the verb only indicates that it is third person). Since the city has been personified as the great prostitute, the feminine pronoun was used in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n660184"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n660184">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here BDAG 1067 s.v. <span class="greek">φυλακή</span> 3 states, “a place where guarding is done<i>, prison</i>…Of the nether world or its place of punishment (<span class="greek">πνεῦμα</span> 2 and 4c) 1 Pt 3:19 (BReicke, The Disobedient Spirits and Christian Baptism ’46, 116f). It is in a <span class="greek">φ</span>. in the latter sense that Satan will be rendered harmless during the millennium Rv 20:7. The fallen city of Babylon becomes a <span class="greek">φυλακή</span> <i>haunt</i> for all kinds of unclean spirits and birds 18:2ab.”</p></p>
<p id="n660185"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n660185">5</a> <p><b>tc</b> There are several problems in this verse. It seems that according to the ms evidence the first two phrases (i.e., “and a haunt for every unclean spirit, and a haunt for every unclean bird” [<span class="greek">καὶ φυλακὴ παντὸς πνεύματος ἀκαθάρτου καὶ φυλακὴ παντὸς ὀρνέου ἀκαθάρτου</span>, <span class="translit">kai phulakē pantos pneumatos akathartou kai phulakē pantos orneou akathartou</span>]) are to be regarded as authentic, though there are some ms discrepancies. The similar beginnings (<span class="greek">καὶ φυλακὴ παντός</span>) and endings (<span class="greek">ἀκαθάρτου</span>) of each phrase would easily account for some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> omitting one or the other phrase. The third phrase (“a haunt for every unclean animal” [<span class="greek">καὶ φυλακὴ παντὸς θηρίου ἀκαθάρτου</span>, <span class="translit">kai phulakē pantos thēriou akathartou</span>]), however, is more problematic since it is missing in several significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C<sup></sup> 051 <span class="apparatus">M</span>). The passage as a whole, including the third phrase, seems to be an allusion to Isa 13:21 and 34:11. It seems reasonable, in such a case, to assume that since there is good ms evidence to support the third phrase (A 1611 2329 <i>al</i>), it probably dropped out of certain <span class="smcaps">mss</span> because of its similarity to the two preceding clauses. It is the presence of all three phrases in the initial text that most likely gave rise to the divergent ms evidence extant today.</p></p>
<p id="n660186"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n660186">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “all the Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n660187"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n660187">7</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C 1006* 1611 1841 2030 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup>), including the best witnesses, read “have fallen” (<span class="greek">πεπτώκασιν</span> or <span class="greek">πέπτωκαν</span> [<span class="translit">peptōkasin</span> or <span class="translit">peptōkan</span>]). The singular <span class="greek">πέπτωκεν</span> (<span class="translit">peptōken</span>), which is better grammatically with the <i>neuter</i> plural subject <span class="greek">πάντα τὰ ἔθνη</span> (<span class="translit">panta ta ethnē</span>, “all the nations”), is read by 1854 2062; 2042 reads <span class="greek">πεπότικεν</span> (<span class="translit">pepotiken</span>). A few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (1006<sup>c</sup> 2329 latt sy<sup>h</sup>) read “have drunk” (<span class="greek">πέπωκαν</span>/<span class="greek">πεπώκασιν</span>, <span class="translit">pepōkan</span>/<span class="translit">pepōkasin</span>); the singular <span class="greek">πέπωκεν</span> (<span class="translit">pepōken</span>) is read by P 051 1 2053* <i>al</i>. The more difficult reading and that which has the best ms support is “have fallen.” That it is not too difficult is evidenced by the fact that the great majority of Byzantine minuscules, which have a tendency to smooth out problems, left it stand as is. Nonetheless, it is somewhat difficult (<i>TCGNT</i> 683 says that this reading is “scarcely suitable in the context”), and for that reason certain <span class="smcaps">mss</span> seem to have changed it to “have drunk” to agree with the idea of “wine” (<span class="greek">οἴνου</span>, <span class="translit">oinou</span>). One can understand how this could happen: A scribe coming to the text and seeing the term “wine” expects a verb of drinking. When he sees “have fallen” and knows that in Greek the verbs “have fallen” and “have drunk” are spelled similarly, he concludes that there has been a slip of the pen in the ms he is using, which he then seeks to correct back to the “have drunk” reading. This appears to be more reasonable than to conclude that three early majuscules (i.e., <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C) as well as a great number of other witnesses all felt the need to change “have drunk” (<span class="greek">πέπωκαν</span>) to “have fallen” (<span class="greek">πέπτωκαν</span>), even if “fallen” occurs in the immediate context (“fallen, fallen, [<span class="greek">ἔπεσεν ἔπεσεν</span>, <span class="translit">epesen epesen</span>] Babylon the great” in the preceding verse). The preferred reading, on both external and internal grounds, is “have fallen,” and thus the Seer intends to focus on the effects of wine, namely, a drunken stupor.</p></p>
<p id="n660188"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n660188">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the notes on the words “passion” in Rev 14:8 and “wrath” in 16:19.</p></p>
<p id="n660189"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n660189">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to BDAG 949 s.v. <span class="greek">στρῆνος</span> and <span class="greek">στρηνιάω</span>, these terms can refer either to luxury or sensuality. In the context of Rev 18, however (as L&amp;N 88.254 indicate) the stress is on gratification of the senses by sexual immorality, so that meaning was emphasized in the translation here.</p></p>
<p id="n6601810"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601810">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601811"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601811">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">ἐκολλήθησαν</span> (<span class="translit">ekollēthēsan</span>) BDAG 556 s.v. <span class="greek">κολλάω</span> 2.a.<span class="greek">β</span> states, “fig. <i>cling to = come in close contact with</i> (cp. Ps 21:16; 43:26 <span class="greek">ἐκολλήθη εἰς γῆν ἡ γαστὴρ ἡμῶν</span>. The act.=‘bring into contact’ PGM 5, 457 <span class="greek">κολλήσας τ</span>.<span class="greek"> λίθον τῷ ὠτίῳ</span>) <span class="greek">ἐκολλήθησαν αἱ ἁμαρτίαι ἄχρι τ</span>.<span class="greek"> οὐρανοῦ</span> <i>the sins have touched the heaven = reached the sky</i> (two exprs. are telescoped) Rv 18:5.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601812"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601812">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “up to the sky” (the same Greek word means both “heaven” and “sky”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601813"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601813">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, remembered her sins to execute judgment on them.</p></p>
<p id="n6601814"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601814">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “her sins.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601815"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “others” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6601816"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601816">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 252 s.v. <span class="greek">διπλόω</span> states, “<i>to double</i> <span class="greek">τὰ διπλᾶ</span> <i>pay back double</i> Rv 18:6.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601817"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601817">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> “As much as” is the translation of <span class="greek">ὅσα</span> (<span class="translit">hosa</span>). </p></p>
<p id="n6601818"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601818">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">ἐστρηνίασεν</span> (<span class="translit">estrēniasen</span>) BDAG 949 s.v. <span class="greek">στρηνιάω</span> states, “<i>live in luxury, live sensually</i> Rv 18:7. W. <span class="greek">πορνεύειν</span> vs. 9.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601819"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601819">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said in her heart,” an idiom for saying something to oneself.</p></p>
<p id="n6601820"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601820">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For this reason, her plagues will come.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601821"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601821">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “death.” <span class="greek">θάνατος</span> (<span class="translit">thanatos</span>) can in particular contexts refer to a manner of death, specifically a contagious disease (see BDAG 443 s.v. 3; L&amp;N 23.158).</p></p>
<p id="n6601822"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601822">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is the same Greek word (<span class="greek">πένθος</span>, <span class="translit">penthos</span>) translated “grief” in vv. 7-8.</p></p>
<p id="n6601823"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601823">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here “burned down” was used to translate <span class="greek">κατακαυθήσεται</span> (<span class="translit">katakauthēsetai</span>) because a city is in view.</p></p>
<p id="n6601824"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601824">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601825"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601825">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">ἐστρηνίασεν</span> (<span class="translit">estrēniasen</span>) BDAG 949 s.v. <span class="greek">στρηνιάω</span> states, “<i>live in luxury, live sensually</i> Rv 18:7. W. <span class="greek">πορνεύειν</span> vs. 9.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601826"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601826">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the burning of her.” For the translation “the smoke from the fire that burns her up,” see L&amp;N 14.63.</p></p>
<p id="n6601827"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601827">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “judgment,” condemnation,” “punishment.” BDAG 569 s.v. <span class="greek">κρίσις</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">β</span> states, “The word oft. means <i>judgment</i> that goes against a person, <i>condemnation</i>, and the <i>sentence</i> that follows…<span class="greek">ἡ κ</span>.<span class="greek"> σου</span> <i>your judgment</i> Rv 18:10.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601828"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601828">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601829"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601829">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">γόμος</span> (<span class="translit">gomos</span>) BDAG 205 s.v. states, “<i>load, freight</i>…<i>cargo</i> of a ship…Ac 21:3. W. gen. of the owner Rv 18:11. W. gen. of content…<span class="greek">γ</span>.<span class="greek"> χρυσοῦ</span> <i>a cargo of gold</i> vs. 12.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601830"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601830">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and silver,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated before most of these terms since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more</p></p>
<p id="n6601831"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601831">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 924-25 s.v. <span class="greek">σιρικός</span> states, “per. to silk from Ser, subst. <span class="greek">τὸ σιρικόν</span> <i>silk</i> cloth or garments w. other costly materials Rv 18:12.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601832"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601832">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the translation of <span class="greek">κόκκινον</span> (<span class="translit">kokkinon</span>) as “scarlet cloth” see L&amp;N 6.170.</p></p>
<p id="n6601833"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601833">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the phrase <span class="greek">πᾶν ξύλον θύϊνον</span> (<span class="translit">pan xulon thuinon</span>) L&amp;N 3.63 states, “pertaining to being made or consisting of citron wood (that is, from a citron tree)—‘of citron wood.’ <span class="greek">καὶ πᾶν ξύλον θύϊνον καὶ πᾶν σκεῦος ἐλεφάντινον</span> ‘and all kinds of things made of citron wood and all kinds of objects made of ivory’ Re 18:12. The citron tree belongs to the citrus family of plants, and it produces a pale yellow fruit somewhat larger than a lemon, the rind of which is often candied. In Re 18:12, however, the focus is upon the fine quality of the wood.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601834"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601834">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">ἄμωμον</span> (<span class="translit">amōmon</span>) L&amp;N 5.23 states, “a generic term for any kind of spice, though often a specific reference to amomum, an Indian type of spice—‘spice, amomum.’ <span class="greek">κιννάμωμον καὶ ἄμωμον καὶ θυμιάματα</span> ‘cinnamon and spice and incense’ Re 18:13. In most translations <span class="greek">ἄμωμον</span> is interpreted as spice in general.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601835"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601835">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “myrrh,” a strong aromatic ointment often used to prepare a body for burial (L&amp;N 6.205).</p></p>
<p id="n6601836"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601836">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">λίβανος</span> (<span class="translit">libanos</span>) refers to the aromatic resin of a certain type of tree (L&amp;N 6.212).</p></p>
<p id="n6601837"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601837">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">σεμίδαλις</span> (<span class="translit">semidalis</span>) L&amp;N 5.10 states, “a fine grade of wheat flour—‘fine flour.’ <span class="greek">οἶνον καὶ ἔλαιον καὶ σεμίδαλιν καὶ σῖτον</span> ‘wine and oil and fine flour and wheat’ Re 18:13. In some languages ‘fine flour’ may be best expressed as ‘expensive flour.’ Such a rendering fits well the context of Re 18:13.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601838"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601838">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and wagons.” On the term <span class="greek">ῥέδη</span> (<span class="translit">rhedē</span>) see L&amp;N 6.53: “a four-wheeled carriage or wagon used for travel or the transportation of loads—‘carriage, wagon.’ The term <span class="greek">ῥέδη</span> occurs only in Re 18:13 in a list of products bought and sold by merchants.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601839"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601839">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and bodies and souls of men.” This could be understood (1) as a hendiadys (two things mentioned = one thing meant), referring only to slave trade; (2) it could be referring to two somewhat different concepts: slavery (bodies) and the cheapness of human life—some of the items earlier in the list of merchandise were to be obtained only at great cost of human life; or (3) a somewhat related idea, that the trade is in not just physical bodies (slavery) but human souls (people whose lives are destroyed through this trade).</p></p>
<p id="n6601840"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601840">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">ὀπώρα</span> (<span class="translit">opōra</span>) L&amp;N 3.34 states, “<span class="greek">ἡ ὀπώρα σου τῆς ἐπιθυμίας τῆς ψυχῆς</span> ‘the ripe fruit for which you longed’ Re 18:14. In this one occurrence of <span class="greek">ὀπώρα</span> in the NT, ‘ripe fruit’ is to be understood in a figurative sense of ‘good things.’”</p></p>
<p id="n6601841"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601841">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you desired in your soul.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601842"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601842">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">λιπαρός</span> (<span class="translit">liparos</span>) BDAG 597 s.v. states, “<i>luxury</i> Rv 18:14.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601843"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601843">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">τὰ λαμπρά</span> (<span class="translit">ta lampra</span>) BDAG 585 s.v. <span class="greek">λαμπρός</span> 4 states, “<i>splendor</i>…in which a rich man takes delight (cp. Jos., Ant. 12, 220 <span class="greek">δωρεὰς δοὺς λαμπράς</span>) Rv 18:14.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601844"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601844">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Verse 14 is set in parentheses because in it the city, Babylon, is addressed directly in second person. </p><p><b>sn</b> This verse forms a parenthetical aside in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601845"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601845">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the merchants [sellers] of these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601846"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601846">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “her torment, weeping.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started in the translation by supplying the words “They will” here.</p></p>
<p id="n6601847"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601847">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “clothing” is supplied to clarify that the words “purple” and “scarlet” refer to cloth or garments rather than colors.</p></p>
<p id="n6601848"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601848">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “gilded with gold” (an instance of semantic reinforcement, see L&amp;N 49.29).</p></p>
<p id="n6601849"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601849">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">ἠρημώθη</span> (<span class="translit">ērēmōthē</span>) L&amp;N 20.41 states, “to suffer destruction, with the implication of being deserted and abandoned—‘to be destroyed, to suffer destruction, to suffer desolation.’ <span class="greek">ἐρημόομαι</span>: <span class="greek">μιᾷ ὥρᾳ ἠρημώθη ὁ τοσοῦτος πλοῦτος</span> ‘such great wealth has been destroyed within a single hour’ Re 18:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601850"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601850">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">κυβερνήτης</span> (<span class="translit">kubernētēs</span>) BDAG 574 s.v. 1 states, “one who is responsible for the management of a ship, <i>shipmaster,</i> lit. Rv 18:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601851"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601851">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “everyone who sails as a passenger.” On <span class="greek">πλέων</span> (<span class="translit">pleōn</span>) BDAG 825 s.v. <span class="greek">πλέω</span> states, “<span class="greek">πᾶς ὁ ἐπὶ τόπον πλέων</span> <i>everyone who sails to a place = seafarer, sea traveler</i>…Rv 18:17. The vv.ll.…have led to various interpretations. Some render: <i>everyone who sails along the coast</i>…See EbNestle, Einführung in das Griech. NT 1909, 182; AFridrichsen, K. Hum. Vetensk.-Samf. i Upps. Årsb. ’43, 31 note <span class="greek">ὁ ἐπίτοπον πλέων</span>=one who sails occasionally, a passenger.—S. also IHeikel, StKr 106, ’34/’35, 317).”</p></p>
<p id="n6601852"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601852">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and as many as.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601853"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601853">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the imperfect <span class="greek">ἔκραζον</span> (<span class="translit">ekrazon</span>) has been translated ingressively.</p></p>
<p id="n6601854"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601854">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the burning of her, saying.” For the translation “the smoke from the fire that burned her up,” see L&amp;N 14.63. Here the participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>, “saying”) has not been translated because it is redundant in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n6601855"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601855">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with weeping and mourning, saying.” Here the participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) has not been translated because it is redundant in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n6601856"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601856">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">ἡρημώθη</span> (<span class="translit">hērēmōthē</span>) L&amp;N 20.41 states, “to suffer destruction, with the implication of being deserted and abandoned—‘to be destroyed, to suffer destruction, to suffer desolation.’ <span class="greek">ἐρημόομαι</span>: <span class="greek">μιᾷ ὥρᾳ ἠρημώθη ὁ τοσοῦτος πλοῦτος</span> ‘such great wealth has been destroyed within a single hour’ Re 18:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601857"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601857">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the phrase “pronounced judgment” BDAG 567 s.v. <span class="greek">κρίμα</span> 4.b states, “The OT is the source of the expr. <span class="greek">κρίνειν τὸ κρ</span>. (cp. Zech 7:9; 8:16; Ezk 44:24) <span class="greek">ἔκρινεν ὁ θεὸς τὸ κρίμα ὑμῶν ἐξ αὐτῆς</span> <i>God has pronounced judgment for you against her</i> or <i>God has pronounced on her the judgment she wished to impose on you</i> (HHoltzmann, Hdb. 1893 ad loc.) Rv 18:20.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601858"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601858">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God has judged a judgment of you of her.” Verse 20 is set in parentheses because in it the saints, etc. are addressed directly in the second person. </p><p><b>sn</b> This verse forms a parenthetical aside in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601859"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601859">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n6601860"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601860">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> On <span class="greek">ὅρμημα</span> (<span class="translit">hormēma</span>) BDAG 724 s.v. states, “<i>violent rush, onset</i> <span class="greek">ὁρμήματι βληθήσεται Βαβυλών</span> <i>Babylon will be thrown down with violence</i> Rv 18:21.” L&amp;N 68.82 refers to the suddenness of the force or violence.</p></p>
<p id="n6601861"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601861">61</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Thrown down</i> is a play on both the words and the action. The angel’s action with the stone illustrates the kind of sudden violent force with which the city will be overthrown.</p></p>
<p id="n6601862"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601862">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> The shift to a second person pronoun here corresponds to the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n6601863"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601863">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601864"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601864">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 1001 s.v. <span class="greek">τεχνίτης</span> states, “<i>craftsperson, artisan, designer</i>…Of a silversmith Ac 19:24, 25 v.l., 38….Of a potter 2 Cl 8:2 (metaph., cp. Ath. 15:2). <span class="greek">πᾶς τεχνίτης πάσης τέχνης</span> Rv 18:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601865"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601865">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a different Greek word (<span class="greek">μύλος</span>, <span class="translit">mulos</span>) from the one for the millstone in v. 21 (<span class="greek">μύλινος</span>, <span class="translit">mulinos</span>). See L&amp;N 7.68.</p></p>
<p id="n6601866"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601866">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “all the Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601867"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601867">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">φαρμακεία</span> (<span class="translit">pharmakeia</span>, “magic spells”) see L&amp;N 53.100: “the use of magic, often involving drugs and the casting of spells upon people—‘to practice magic, to cast spells upon, to engage in sorcery, magic, sorcery.’ <span class="greek">φαρμακεία</span>: <span class="greek">ἐν τῇ φαρμακείᾳ σου ἐπλανήθησαν πάντα τὰ ἔθνη</span> ‘with your magic spells you deceived all the peoples (of the world)’ Re 18:23.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601868"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601868">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601869"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601869">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> The shift in pronouns from second to third person corresponds to the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n6601870"><a href="file1251.xhtml#n6601870">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and of all.” The phrase “along with the blood” has been repeated from the previous clause for stylistic reasons.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
