<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Colossians 3</h2>
<p id="n510031"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n510031">1</a> <p><b>tc</b> Certain <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B<sup>[</sup>*<sup>]</sup> D<sup>1</sup> H 0278 1175 1505 1739 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy sa) read <span class="greek">ἡμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">hēmōn</span>, “our”), while others (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C D* F G P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 33 81 1881 <i>al</i> latt bo) read <span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">humōn</span>, “your”). Internally, it is possible that the second person pronoun arose through scribal conformity to the second person pronoun used previously in v. 3 (<span class="greek">ὑμῶν</span>) and following in v. 4 (<span class="greek">ὑμεῖς</span>, <span class="translit">humeis</span>). But in terms of external criteria, the second person pronoun has superior ms support (though there is an Alexandrian split) and <span class="greek">ἡμῶν</span> may have arisen through accident (error of sight) or scribal attempt to universalize the statement since <i>all</i> Christians have Jesus as their life. See <i>TCGNT</i> 557.</p></p>
<p id="n510032"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n510032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the members which are on the earth.” See BDAG 628 s.v. <span class="greek">μέλος</span> <span class="greek">1</span>, “put to death whatever in you is worldly.”</p></p>
<p id="n510033"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n510033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “lust.”</p></p>
<p id="n510034"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n510034">4</a> <p><b>tc</b> The words <span class="greek">ἐπὶ τοὺς υἱοὺς τῆς ἀπειθείας</span> (<span class="translit">epi tous huious tēs apeitheias</span>, “on the sons of disobedience”) are lacking in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B b sa Cl Ambst Hier, but are found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D F G H I <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 0278 33 1175 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy bo. The words are omitted by several English translations (NASB, NIV, ESV, TNIV). This textual problem is quite difficult to resolve. On the one hand, the parallel account in Eph 5:6 has these words, thus providing scribes a motive for adding them here. On the other hand, the reading without the words may be too hard: The <span class="greek">ἐν οἷς</span> (<span class="translit">en |ois</span>) of v. 7 seems to have no antecedent without <span class="greek">υἱούς</span> already in the text, although it could possibly be construed as neuter referring to the vice list in v. 5. Further, although the witness of B is especially significant, there are other places in which B and <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> share errant readings of omission. Nevertheless, the strength of the internal evidence against the longer reading is at least sufficient to cause doubt here. The decision to retain the words in the text is less than certain. </p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>sons of disobedience</i> is a Semitic idiom that means “people characterized by disobedience.” In this context it refers to “all those who are disobedient.” Cf. Eph 5:6.</p></p>
<p id="n510035"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n510035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you also walked.” The verb <span class="greek">περιπατέω</span> (<span class="translit">peripateō</span>) is commonly used in the NT to refer to behavior or conduct of one’s life (L&amp;N 41.11).</p></p>
<p id="n510036"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n510036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek article with <span class="greek">τὰ πάντα</span> (<span class="translit">ta panta</span>) is anaphoric, referring to the previous list of vices, and has been translated here as “all <i>such</i> things.”</p></p>
<p id="n510037"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n510037">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Put off all such things</i>. The commands in vv. 8-9 are based on two reasons given in vv. 9-10—reasons which are expressed in terms of a metaphor about clothing oneself. Paul says that they have put off the old man and have put on the new man. Two things need to be discussed in reference to Paul’s statement. (1) What is the meaning of the clothing imagery (i.e., the “<i>have put off</i>” and “<i>have been clothed</i>”)? (2) What is the meaning of the <i>old man</i> and the <i>new man</i>? Though some commentators understand the participles “<i>have put off</i>” (v. 9) and “<i>have been clothed</i>” (v. 10) as imperatives (i.e., “put off!” and “put on!”), this use of participles is extremely rare in the NT and thus unlikely here. It is better to take them as having the semantic force of indicatives, and thus they give an explanation of what had happened to the Colossians at the time of their conversion—they had taken off the <i>old man</i> and put on the <i>new</i> when they trusted in Christ (cf. 1:4). While it is difficult to say for certain what the background to Paul’s “clothing” metaphor might be (whether it is primarily Jewish and comes from the OT, or primarily Gentile and comes from some facet of the Greco-Roman religious milieu), it is nonetheless clear, on the basis of Paul’s usage of the expression, that the <i>old man</i> refers to man as he is in Adam and dominated by sin (cf. Rom 6:6; Eph 4:22), while the <i>new man</i> refers to the Christian whose new sphere of existence is in Christ. Though the metaphor of clothing oneself primarily reflects outward actions, there is a distinct inward aspect to it, as the rest of v. 10 indicates: <i>being renewed in knowledge according to the image of the one who created it</i>. Paul’s point, then, is that Christians should take off their dirty clothing (inappropriate behavior) and put on clean clothing (behavior consistent with knowing Christ) because this has already been accomplished in a positional sense at the time of their conversion (cf. Gal 3:27 with Rom 13:14).</p></p>
<p id="n510038"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n510038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on “fellow slave” in 1:7.</p></p>
<p id="n510039"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n510039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> If the genitive construct <span class="greek">σπλάγχνα οἰκτιρμοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">splanchna oiktirmou</span>) is a hendiadys then it would be “compassion” or “tenderheartedness.” See M. J. Harris, <i>Colossians and Philemon</i> (EGGNT), 161.</p></p>
<p id="n5100310"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n5100310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the translation of <span class="greek">χαριζόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">charizomenoi</span>) as “forgiving,” see BDAG 1078 s.v. <span class="greek">χαρίζομαι</span> 3. The two participles “bearing” (<span class="greek">ἀνεχόμενοι</span>, <span class="translit">anechomenoi</span>) and “forgiving” (<span class="greek">χαριζόμενοι</span>) express the means by which the action of the finite verb “clothe yourselves” is to be carried out.</p></p>
<p id="n5100311"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n5100311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if someone has”; the term “happens,” though not in the Greek text, is inserted to bring out the force of the third class condition. </p></p>
<p id="n5100312"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n5100312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression “forgive others” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. It is included in the translation to make the sentence complete and more comprehensible to the English reader. </p></p>
<p id="n5100313"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n5100313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 365 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπί</span> 7 suggests “<i>to all these</i>” as a translation for <span class="greek">ἐπὶ πᾶσιν δὲ τούτοις</span> (<span class="translit">epi pasin de toutois</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n5100314"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n5100314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “virtues” is not in the Greek text, but is included in the translation to specify the antecedent and to make clear the sense of the pronoun “these.” </p></p>
<p id="n5100315"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n5100315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb “add,” though not in the Greek text, is implied, picking up the initial imperative “clothe yourselves.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100316"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n5100316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive <span class="greek">τῆς τελειότητος</span> (<span class="translit">tēs teleiotētos</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive, “the perfect bond.”</p></p>
<p id="n5100317"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n5100317">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in one body.” This phrase emphasizes the manner in which the believers were called, not the goal of their calling, and focuses upon their unity.</p></p>
<p id="n5100318"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n5100318">18</a> <p><b>tc</b> Since “the word of Christ” occurs nowhere else in the NT, two predictable variants arose: “word of God” and “word of the Lord.” Even though some of the witnesses for these variants are impressive (<span class="greek">κυρίου</span> [<span class="translit">kuriou</span>, “of the Lord”] in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* I 1175 bo Cl; <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> [<span class="translit">theou</span>, “of God”] in A C* 33 104 323 945 <i>al</i>), the reading <span class="greek">Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">Christou</span>, “of Christ”) is read by an excellent cross-section of witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> B C<sup>2</sup> D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 1505 1739 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sa). On both internal and external grounds, <span class="greek">Χριστοῦ</span> is strongly preferred. </p></p>
<p id="n5100319"><a href="file1161.xhtml#n5100319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with grace”; “all” is supplied as it is implicitly related to all the previous instructions in the verse.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
