<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Timothy 5</h2>
<p id="n540051"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n540051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Do not speak harshly to an older man.”</p></p>
<p id="n540052"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n540052">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> No verb “speak” is stated in this clause, but it continues the sense of the preceding.</p></p>
<p id="n540053"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n540053">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> The word <i>honor</i> here carries the double meaning of respect and financial support. This Greek word can imply both senses, and both are intended in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n540054"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n540054">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the real widows,” “those who are really widows.”</p></p>
<p id="n540055"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n540055">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to practice their religion.”</p></p>
<p id="n540056"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n540056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and so make some repayment to their parents”; <i>Grk</i> “and to give back recompense to their parents.”</p></p>
<p id="n540057"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n540057">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for this is pleasing in the sight of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n540058"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n540058">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “left all alone.”</p></p>
<p id="n540059"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n540059">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> For “is dead even” the Greek text reads “has died.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400510"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n5400511"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and command these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400512"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “his own relatives.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400513"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400513">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>list</i> was an official enrollment, apparently with a formal pledge to continue as a widow and serve the Lord in that way (cf. v. 12). It was either (1) the list of “true widows” who were given support by the church or (2) a smaller group of older women among the supported widows who were qualified for special service (perhaps to orphans, other widows, the sick, etc.). Most commentators understand it to be the former, since a special group is not indicated clearly. See G. W. Knight, <i>Pastoral Epistles</i>, 222-23 for discussion.</p></p>
<p id="n5400514"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let a widow be enrolled if she has reached not less than sixty years.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400515"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a woman married only once,” “was devoted solely to her husband” (see the note on “wife” in 1 Tim 3:2; also 1 Tim 3:12; Titus 1:6).</p></p>
<p id="n5400516"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if she raised children.” The phrase “if she raised children” begins a series of conditional clauses running to the end of the verse. These provide specific examples of her good works (v. 10a).</p></p>
<p id="n5400517"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “followed after every good work.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400518"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “refuse younger widows.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400519"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> With a single verb and object, this clause means “pursue sensuous desires in opposition to Christ.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400520"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “incurring judgment because they reject their first faith.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>pledge</i> refers most likely to a vow not to remarry undertaken when a widow is put on the list (cf. 1 Tim 5:9).</p></p>
<p id="n5400521"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 15.23 suggests the meaning, “to move about from place to place, with significant changes in direction—‘to travel about, to wander about.’”</p></p>
<p id="n5400522"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “idle.” The whole clause (“going around from house to house, they learn to be lazy”) reverses the order of the Greek. The present participle <span class="greek">περιερχόμεναι</span> (<span class="translit">perierchomenai</span>) may be taken as temporal (“<i>while</i> going around”), instrumental (“<i>by</i> going around”) or result (“<i>with the result that</i> they go around”).</p></p>
<p id="n5400523"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying the things that are unnecessary.” Or perhaps “talking about things that are none of their business.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400524"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the sake of reviling.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400525"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “wandered away after Satan.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400526"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400526">26</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses (D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> sy) have <span class="greek">πιστὸς ἤ</span> (<span class="translit">pistos ē</span>) before <span class="greek">πιστή</span> (<span class="translit">pistē</span>), with the resultant meaning “if a believing man or woman.” But such looks to be a motivated reading, perhaps to bring some parity to the responsibilities of men and women listed here, and as a way of harmonizing with v. 4. Further, most of the earlier and better witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C F G P 048 33 81 1739 1881 co) lack the <span class="greek">πιστὸς ἤ</span>, strengthening the preference for the shorter reading. </p></p>
<p id="n5400527"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has widows.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400528"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the real widows,” “those who are really widows.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400529"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who lead well.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400530"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “deserving.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400531"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400531">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Like the similar use of “honor” in v. 3, this phrase denotes both respect and remuneration: “honor plus honorarium.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400532"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in preaching”; <i>Grk</i> “in word.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400533"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400533">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 25:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5400534"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400534">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Luke 10:7.</p></p>
<p id="n5400535"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400535">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Deut 17:6; 19:15.</p></p>
<p id="n5400536"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400536">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> As a continuation of v. 19, this refers to elders who sin, not to sinning believers more generally.</p></p>
<p id="n5400537"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “censured.” The Greek word implies exposing someone’s sin in order to bring correction.</p></p>
<p id="n5400538"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Before all” probably refers to the whole congregation, not just all the elders; “the rest” is more likely to denote the remaining elders.</p></p>
<p id="n5400539"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400539">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that the rest may have fear.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400540"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400540">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “doing nothing according to partiality.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400541"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400541">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> In context “laying hands on anyone” refers to ordination or official installation of someone as an elder.</p></p>
<p id="n5400542"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400542">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and do not share in the sins of others.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400543"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the sake of your stomach.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400544"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400544">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> This verse gives parenthetical advice to Timothy, to clarify what it means to keep pure (5:22c). Verse 24 resumes the instructions about elders.</p></p>
<p id="n5400545"><a href="file1178.xhtml#n5400545">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they [the sins] follow after others.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
