<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Philippians 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Philippians<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Christian Practices</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> So then, my brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n500041" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n500041">1</a></sup> dear friends whom I long to see, my joy and crown, stand in the Lord in this way, my dear friends! </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:2</span> I appeal to Euodia and to Syntyche to agree in the Lord. <span class="verse">4:3</span> Yes, I say also to you, true companion,<sup><a id="n500042" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n500042">2</a></sup> help them. They have struggled together in the gospel ministry<sup><a id="n500043" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n500043">3</a></sup> along with me and Clement and my other coworkers, whose names are in the book of life. <span class="verse">4:4</span> Rejoice in the Lord always. Again I say, rejoice! <span class="verse">4:5</span> Let everyone see your gentleness.<sup><a id="n500044" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n500044">4</a></sup> The Lord is near! <span class="verse">4:6</span> Do not be anxious about anything. Instead, in every situation, through prayer and petition with thanksgiving, tell your requests to God. <span class="verse">4:7</span> And the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and minds<sup><a id="n500045" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n500045">5</a></sup> in Christ Jesus. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:8</span> Finally, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n500046" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n500046">6</a></sup> whatever is true, whatever is worthy of respect, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is commendable, if something is excellent or praiseworthy, think about these things. <span class="verse">4:9</span> And what you learned and received and heard and saw in me, do these things. And the God of peace will be with you. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Appreciation for Support</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:10</span> I have great joy in the Lord because now at last you have again expressed your concern for me. (Now I know you were concerned before but had no opportunity to do anything.)<sup><a id="n500047" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n500047">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:11</span> I am not saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be content in any circumstance. <span class="verse">4:12</span> I have experienced times of need and times of abundance. In any and every circumstance I have learned the secret of contentment,<sup><a id="n500048" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n500048">8</a></sup> whether I go satisfied or hungry, have plenty or nothing. <span class="verse">4:13</span> I am able to do all things<sup><a id="n500049" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n500049">9</a></sup> through the one<sup><a id="n5000410" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n5000410">10</a></sup> who strengthens me. <span class="verse">4:14</span> Nevertheless, you did well to share with me in my trouble. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:15</span> And as you Philippians know, at the beginning of my gospel ministry, when I left Macedonia, no church shared with me in this matter of giving and receiving except you alone. <span class="verse">4:16</span> For even in Thessalonica on more than one occasion<sup><a id="n5000412" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n5000412">12</a></sup> you sent something for my need. <span class="verse">4:17</span> I do not say this because I am seeking a gift.<sup><a id="n5000413" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n5000413">13</a></sup> Rather, I seek the credit that abounds to your account. <span class="verse">4:18</span> For I have received everything, and I have plenty. I have all I need because I received from Epaphroditus what you sent—a fragrant offering, an acceptable sacrifice, very pleasing to God. <span class="verse">4:19</span> And my God will supply your every need according to his glorious riches in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">4:20</span> May glory be given to God our Father forever and ever. Amen. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Final Greetings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:21</span> Give greetings to all the saints in Christ Jesus. The brothers<sup><a id="n5000414" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n5000414">14</a></sup> with me here send greetings. <span class="verse">4:22</span> All the saints greet you, especially those who belong to Caesar’s household. <span class="verse">4:23</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.<sup><a id="n5000415" href="file1157_notes.xhtml#n5000415">15</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>