<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Galatians 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Galatians<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Justification by Law or by Faith?</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> You<sup><a id="n480031" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n480031">1</a></sup> foolish Galatians! Who has cast a spell<sup><a id="n480032" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n480032">2</a></sup> on you? Before your eyes Jesus Christ was vividly portrayed<sup><a id="n480033" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n480033">3</a></sup> as crucified! <span class="verse">3:2</span> The only thing I want to learn from you is this: Did you receive the Spirit by doing the works of the law<sup><a id="n480034" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n480034">4</a></sup> or by believing what you heard?<sup><a id="n480035" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n480035">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:3</span> Are you so foolish? Although you began<sup><a id="n480036" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n480036">6</a></sup> with<sup><a id="n480037" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n480037">7</a></sup> the Spirit, are you now trying to finish<sup><a id="n480038" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n480038">8</a></sup> by human effort?<sup><a id="n480039" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n480039">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:4</span> Have you suffered so many things for nothing?—if indeed it was for nothing. <span class="verse">3:5</span> Does God then give<sup><a id="n4800310" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800310">10</a></sup> you the Spirit and work miracles among you by your doing the works of the law<sup><a id="n4800311" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800311">11</a></sup> or by your believing what you heard?<sup><a id="n4800312" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800312">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:6</span> Just as Abraham <i><b>believed</b></i> <i><b>God, and it was credited to him as righteousness</b></i>,<sup><a id="n4800313" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800313">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:7</span> so then, understand<sup><a id="n4800314" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800314">14</a></sup> that those who believe are the sons of Abraham.<sup><a id="n4800315" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800315">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:8</span> And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, proclaimed the gospel to Abraham ahead of time,<sup><a id="n4800316" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800316">16</a></sup> saying, “<b><i>All the nations</i></b><sup><a id="n4800317" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800317">17</a></sup> <b><i>will be blessed in you</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4800318" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800318">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:9</span> So then those who believe<sup><a id="n4800319" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800319">19</a></sup> are blessed along with Abraham the believer. <span class="verse">3:10</span> For all who<sup><a id="n4800320" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800320">20</a></sup> rely on doing the works of the law are under a curse, because it is written, “<i><b>Cursed is everyone who does not keep on doing everything written in the book of the law</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4800321" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800321">21</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:11</span> Now it is clear no one is justified before God by the law, because <i><b>the righteous one will live by faith</b></i>.<sup><a id="n4800322" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800322">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:12</span> But the law is not based on faith,<sup><a id="n4800323" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800323">23</a></sup> but <b><i>the one who does</i></b> the works of the law<sup><a id="n4800324" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800324">24</a></sup> <b><i>will live by them</i></b>.<sup><a id="n4800325" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800325">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:13</span> Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming<sup><a id="n4800326" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800326">26</a></sup> a curse for us (because it is written, “<b><i>Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree</i></b>”)<sup><a id="n4800327" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800327">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:14</span> in order that in Christ Jesus the blessing of Abraham would come to the Gentiles,<sup><a id="n4800328" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800328">28</a></sup> so that we could receive the promise of the Spirit by faith. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Inheritance Comes from Promises and not Law</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:15</span> Brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n4800329" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800329">29</a></sup> I offer an example from everyday life:<sup><a id="n4800330" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800330">30</a></sup> When a covenant<sup><a id="n4800331" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800331">31</a></sup> has been ratified,<sup><a id="n4800332" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800332">32</a></sup> even though it is only a human contract, no one can set it aside or add anything to it. <span class="verse">3:16</span> Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his descendant.<sup><a id="n4800333" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800333">33</a></sup> Scripture<sup><a id="n4800334" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800334">34</a></sup> does not say, “and to the descendants<span class="smcaps">,”</span><sup><a id="n4800335" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800335">35</a></sup> referring to many, but “<b><i>and</i></b> <b><i>to your descendant</i></b><span class="smcaps">,”</span><sup><a id="n4800336" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800336">36</a></sup> referring to one, who is Christ. <span class="verse">3:17</span> What I am saying is this: The law that came 430 years later does not cancel a covenant previously ratified by God,<sup><a id="n4800337" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800337">37</a></sup> so as to invalidate the promise. <span class="verse">3:18</span> For if the inheritance is based on the law, it is no longer based on the promise, but God graciously gave<sup><a id="n4800338" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800338">38</a></sup> it to Abraham through the promise. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:19</span> Why then was the law given?<sup><a id="n4800339" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800339">39</a></sup> It was added<sup><a id="n4800340" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800340">40</a></sup> because of transgressions,<sup><a id="n4800341" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800341">41</a></sup> until the arrival of the descendant<sup><a id="n4800342" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800342">42</a></sup> to whom the promise had been made. It was administered<sup><a id="n4800343" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800343">43</a></sup> through angels by an intermediary.<sup><a id="n4800344" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800344">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:20</span> Now an intermediary is not for one party alone, but God is one.<sup><a id="n4800345" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800345">45</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:21</span> Is the law therefore opposed to the promises of God?<sup><a id="n4800346" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800346">46</a></sup> Absolutely not! For if a law had been given that was able to give life, then righteousness would certainly have come by the law.<sup><a id="n4800347" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800347">47</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:22</span> But the scripture imprisoned<sup><a id="n4800348" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800348">48</a></sup> everything under sin so that the promise could be given—because of the faithfulness<sup><a id="n4800349" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800349">49</a></sup> of Jesus Christ—to those who believe. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Sons of God Are Heirs of Promise</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:23</span> Now before faith<sup><a id="n4800350" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800350">50</a></sup> came we were held in custody under the law, being kept as prisoners<sup><a id="n4800351" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800351">51</a></sup> until the coming faith would be revealed. <span class="verse">3:24</span> Thus the law had become our guardian<sup><a id="n4800352" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800352">52</a></sup> until Christ, so that we could be declared righteous<sup><a id="n4800353" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800353">53</a></sup> by faith. <span class="verse">3:25</span> But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian.<sup><a id="n4800354" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800354">54</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:26</span> For in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God through faith.<sup><a id="n4800355" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800355">55</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:27</span> For all of you who<sup><a id="n4800356" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800356">56</a></sup> were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ. <span class="verse">3:28</span> There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave<sup><a id="n4800357" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800357">57</a></sup> nor free, there is neither male nor female<sup><a id="n4800358" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800358">58</a></sup> —for all of you are one in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">3:29</span> And if you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham’s descendants,<sup><a id="n4800359" href="file1142_notes.xhtml#n4800359">59</a></sup> heirs according to the promise. </p>

</body>
</html>