<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:1</span> Brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n450101" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n450101">1</a></sup> my heart’s desire and prayer to God on behalf of my fellow Israelites<sup><a id="n450102" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n450102">2</a></sup> is for their salvation. <span class="verse">10:2</span> For I can testify that they are zealous for God,<sup><a id="n450103" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n450103">3</a></sup> but their zeal is not in line with the truth.<sup><a id="n450104" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n450104">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:3</span> For ignoring the righteousness that comes from God, and seeking instead to establish their own righteousness, they did not submit to God’s righteousness. <span class="verse">10:4</span> For Christ is the end of the law, with the result that there is righteousness for everyone who believes. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:5</span> For Moses writes about the righteousness that is by the law: “<b><i>The one who does these things will live by them</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n450105" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n450105">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:6</span> But the righteousness that is by faith says: “<b><i>Do not say in your heart</i></b>,<sup><a id="n450106" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n450106">6</a></sup> ‘<i><b>Who will ascend into heaven</b>?</i>’”<sup><a id="n450107" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n450107">7</a></sup> (that is, to bring Christ down) <span class="verse">10:7</span> or “<b><i>Who will descend into the abyss?</i></b>”<sup><a id="n450108" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n450108">8</a></sup> (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead). <span class="verse">10:8</span> But what does it say? “<i><b>The word is near you, in your mouth and in your heart</b></i>”<sup><a id="n450109" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n450109">9</a></sup> (that is, the word of faith that we preach), <span class="verse">10:9</span> because if you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord<sup><a id="n4501010" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501010">10</a></sup> and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved. <span class="verse">10:10</span> For with the heart one believes and thus has righteousness<sup><a id="n4501011" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501011">11</a></sup> and with the mouth one confesses and thus has salvation.<sup><a id="n4501012" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501012">12</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:11</span> For the scripture says, “<b><i>Everyone who believes in him will not be put to shame</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4501013" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501013">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:12</span> For there is no distinction between the Jew and the Greek, for the same Lord is Lord of all, who richly blesses all who call on him. <span class="verse">10:13</span> For <b><i>everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved</i></b>.<sup><a id="n4501014" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501014">14</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:14</span> How are they to call on one they have not believed in? And how are they to believe in one they have not heard of? And how are they to hear without someone preaching to them?<sup><a id="n4501015" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501015">15</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:15</span> And how are they to preach unless they are sent? As it is written, “<b><i>How timely</i></b><sup><a id="n4501016" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501016">16</a></sup> <b><i>is the arrival</i></b><sup><a id="n4501017" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501017">17</a></sup> <b><i>of those who proclaim the good news</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4501018" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501018">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:16</span> But not all have obeyed the good news, for Isaiah says, “<i><b>Lord, who has believed our report</b></i>?”<sup><a id="n4501019" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501019">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:17</span> Consequently faith comes from what is heard, and what is heard comes through the preached word<sup><a id="n4501020" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501020">20</a></sup> of Christ.<sup><a id="n4501021" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501021">21</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:18</span> But I ask, have they<sup><a id="n4501022" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501022">22</a></sup> not heard?<sup><a id="n4501023" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501023">23</a></sup> Yes, they have:<sup><a id="n4501024" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501024">24</a></sup> <i><b>Their voice has gone out to all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world</b></i>.<sup><a id="n4501025" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501025">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:19</span> But again I ask, didn’t Israel understand?<sup><a id="n4501026" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501026">26</a></sup> First Moses says, “<b><i>I will make you jealous by those who are not a nation; with a senseless nation I will provoke you to anger</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4501027" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501027">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:20</span> And Isaiah is even bold enough to say, “<b><i>I was found by those who did not seek me; I became well known to those who did not ask for me</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4501028" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501028">28</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:21</span> But about Israel he says, “<b><i>All day long I held out my hands to this disobedient and stubborn people!</i></b>”<sup><a id="n4501029" href="file1101_notes.xhtml#n4501029">29</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>