<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n650011"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n650011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Judas,” traditionally “Jude” in English versions to distinguish him from the one who betrayed Jesus. The word “From” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n650012"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n650012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) is normally translated “servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). At the same time, perhaps “servant” is apt in that the <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> of Jesus Christ took on that role voluntarily, unlike a slave. One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. Also, many slaves in the Roman world became slaves through Rome’s subjugation of conquered nations, kidnapping, or by being born into slave households. </p><p><b>sn</b> Undoubtedly the background for the concept of being the Lord’s slave or servant is to be found in the Old Testament scriptures. For a Jew this concept did not connote drudgery, but honor and privilege. It was used of national Israel at times (Isa 43:10), but was especially associated with famous OT personalities, including such great men as Moses (Josh 14:7), David (Ps 89:3; cf. 2 Sam 7:5, 8) and Elijah (2 Kgs 10:10); all these men were “servants (or slaves) of the Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n650013"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n650013">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> Although Jude was half-brother of Jesus, he humbly associates himself with <i>James</i>, his full brother. By first calling himself <i>a slave of Jesus Christ</i>, it is evident that he wants no one to place stock in his physical connections. At the same time, he must identify himself further: Since Jude was a common name in the 1st century (two of Jesus’ disciples were so named, including his betrayer), more information was needed, that is to say, <i>brother of James</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n650014"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n650014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “loved in.” The perfect passive participle suggests that the audience’s relationship to God is not recent; the preposition <span class="greek">ἐν</span> (<span class="translit">en</span>) before <span class="greek">πατρί</span> (<span class="translit">patri</span>) could be taken as sphere or instrument (agency is unlikely, however). Another possible translation would be “dear to God.”</p></p>
<p id="n650015"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n650015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “by.” Datives of agency are quite rare in the NT (and other ancient Greek), almost always found with a perfect verb. Although this text qualifies, in light of the well-worn idiom of <span class="greek">τηρέω</span> (<span class="translit">tēreō</span>) in eschatological contexts, in which God or Christ keeps the believer safe until the <i>parousia</i> (cf. 1 Thess 5:23; 1 Pet 1:4; Rev 3:10; other terms meaning “to guard,” “to keep” are also found in similar eschatological contexts [cf. 2 Thess 3:3; 2 Tim 1:12; 1 Pet 1:5; Jude 24]), it is probably better to understand this verse as having such an eschatological tinge. It is at the same time possible that Jude’s language was intentionally ambiguous, implying both ideas (“kept <i>by</i> Jesus Christ [so that they might be] kept <i>for</i> Jesus Christ”). Elsewhere he displays a certain fondness for wordplays; this may be a hint of things to come.</p></p>
<p id="n650016"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n650016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “may mercy and peace and love be multiplied to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n650017"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n650017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “while being quite diligent to write to you,” <i>or</i> “while making all haste to write to you.” Two issues are at stake: (1) whether <span class="greek">σπουδή</span> (<span class="translit">spoudē</span>) here means <i>diligence</i>, <i>eagerness</i>, or <i>haste</i>; (2) whether <span class="greek">ποιούμενος</span> <span class="greek">γράφειν</span> (<span class="translit">poioumenos graphein</span>) is to be taken conatively (“I was about to write”) or progressively (“I was writing”). Without knowing more of the background, it is difficult to tell which option is to be preferred. </p></p>
<p id="n650018"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n650018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I had the necessity.” The term <span class="greek">ἀνάγκη</span> (<span class="translit">anankē</span>, “necessity”) often connotes urgency or distress. In this context, Jude is indicating that the more comprehensive treatment about the faith shared between himself and his readers was not nearly as urgent as the letter he found it now necessary to write.</p></p>
<p id="n650019"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n650019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “encouraging.” <span class="greek">Παρακαλῶν</span> (<span class="translit">parakalōn</span>) is most likely a telic participle. In keeping with other participles of purpose, it is present tense and occurs after the main verb.</p></p>
<p id="n6500110"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἐπαγωνίζομαι</span> (<span class="translit">epagōnizomai</span>) is an intensive form of <span class="greek">ἀγωνίζομαι</span> (<span class="translit">agōnizomai</span>). As such, the notion of struggling, fighting, contending, etc. is heightened. </p></p>
<p id="n6500111"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <span class="greek">Τῇ πίστει</span> (<span class="translit">tē pistei</span>) here is taken as a dative of advantage (“on behalf of the faith”).</p><p><b>sn</b> The term “faith” has a variety of meanings in the NT. Here, <i>the faith</i> refers to the doctrinal content embraced by believers rather than the act of believing (see BDAG 820 s.v. 3). Rather than discuss the points of agreement that Jude would have with these believers, because of the urgency of the present situation he must assume that these believers were well grounded and press on to encourage them to fight for this common belief.</p></p>
<p id="n6500112"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500112">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> The adverb <i>once for all</i> (<span class="greek">ἅπαξ</span>, <span class="translit">hapax</span>) seems to indicate that the doctrinal convictions of the early church had been substantially codified. That is to say, Jude could appeal to <i>written</i> documents of the Christian faith in his arguments with the false teachers. Most likely, these documents were the letters of Paul and perhaps one or more gospels. First and Second Peter may also have been among the documents Jude has in mind (see also the note on the phrase <i>entrusted to the saints</i> in this verse).</p></p>
<p id="n6500113"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500113">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I now feel compelled instead…saints</i>. Apparently news of some crisis has reached Jude, prompting him to write a different letter than what he had originally planned. A plausible scenario (assuming authenticity of 2 Peter or at least that there are authentic Petrine snippets in it) is that after Peter’s death, Jude intended to write to the same Gentile readers that Peter had written to (essentially, Paul’s churches). Jude starts by affirming that the gospel the Gentiles had received from Paul was the same as the one the Jewish Christians had received from the other apostles (<i>our common salvation</i>). But in the midst of writing this letter, Jude felt that the present crisis deserved another, shorter piece. The crisis, as the letter reveals, is that the false teachers whom Peter prophesied have now infiltrated the church. The letter of Jude is thus an <i>ad hoc</i> letter, intended to confirm the truth of Peter’s letter and encourage the saints to ground their faith in the written documents of the nascent church, rather than listen to the twisted gospel of the false teachers. In large measure, the letter of Jude illustrates the necessity of clinging to the authority of scripture as opposed to those who claim to be prophets.</p></p>
<p id="n6500114"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “people.” However, if Jude is indeed arguing that Peter’s prophecy about false teachers has come true, these are most likely men in the original historical and cultural setting. See discussion of this point in the note on the phrase “these men” in 2 Pet 2:12.</p></p>
<p id="n6500115"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Among you” is not in the Greek text, but is obviously implied.</p><p><b>sn</b> The infiltration referred to by the phrase <i>slipped in among you</i> was predicted by Peter (2 Pet 2:1), Paul (e.g., Acts 20:29-30), and OT prophets.</p></p>
<p id="n6500116"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the past.” The adverb <span class="greek">πάλαι</span> (<span class="translit">palai</span>) can refer to either, though the meaning “long ago” is more common. </p></p>
<p id="n6500117"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “written about.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500118"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for this condemnation.” <span class="greek">τοῦτο</span> (<span class="translit">touto</span>) is almost surely a kataphoric demonstrative pronoun, pointing to what follows in vv. 5-18. Otherwise, the condemnation is only implied (in v. 3b) or is merely a <i>statement</i> of their sinfulness (“ungodly” in v. 4b), not a judgment of it.</p></p>
<p id="n6500119"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “debauchery.” This is the same word Peter uses to predict what the false teachers will be like (2 Pet 2:2, 7, 18).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Turned the grace of our God into a license for evil</i>. One of the implications that the gospel in the apostolic period was truly a gospel of <i>grace</i> was the fact that the enemies of the gospel could pervert it into <i>license</i>. If it were a gospel of works, no such abuse could be imagined. Along these lines, note Rom 6:1—“Are we to remain in sin so that grace may increase?” This question could not have even been asked had the gospel been one of works. But grace is easily misunderstood by those who would abuse it.</p></p>
<p id="n6500120"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500120">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most later witnesses (P<sup>vid</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 5 88 1175 1611 1735 2492 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy) have <span class="greek">θεόν</span> (<span class="translit">theon</span>, “God”) after <span class="greek">δεσπότην</span> (<span class="translit">despotēn</span>, “master”), which appears to be a motivated reading in that it explicitly links “Master” to “God” in keeping with the normal NT pattern (see Luke 2:29; Acts 4:24; 2 Tim 2:21; Rev 6:10). In patristic Greek, <span class="greek">δεσπότης</span> (<span class="translit">despotēs</span>) was used especially of God (cf. BDAG 220 s.v. 1.b.). The earlier and better witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72,78</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C 0251 33 81 323 436 442 1241 1243 1739 2344 <i>al</i> co) lack <span class="greek">θεόν</span>; the shorter reading is thus preferred on both internal and external grounds.</p><p><b>sn</b> The Greek term for <i>Master</i> (<span class="greek">δεσπότης</span>, <span class="translit">despotēs</span>) is the same term the author of 2 Peter used (2 Pet 2:1) to describe his Lord when he prophesied about these false teachers. Since <span class="greek">δεσπότης</span> is used only ten times in the NT, the verbal connection between these two books at this juncture is striking. This is especially so since both Peter and Jude speak of these false teachers as <i>denying</i> the <i>Master</i> (both using the same verb). The basic difference is that Peter is looking to the future, while Jude is arguing that these false teachers are here now.</p></p>
<p id="n6500121"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The terms “Master and Lord” both refer to the same person. The construction in Greek is known as the Granville Sharp rule, named after the English philanthropist-linguist who first clearly articulated the rule in 1798. Sharp pointed out that in the construction article-noun-<span class="greek">καί</span>-noun (where <span class="greek">καί</span> [<span class="translit">kai</span>] = “and”), when two nouns are singular, personal, and common (i.e., not proper names), they <i>always</i> had the same referent. Illustrations such as “the friend and brother,” “the God and Father,” etc. abound in the NT to prove Sharp’s point. For more discussion see <i>ExSyn</i> 270-78. See also Titus 2:13 and 2 Pet 1:1 </p></p>
<p id="n6500122"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing all things.” The subject of the participle “knowing” (<span class="greek">εἰδότας</span>, <span class="translit">eidotas</span>) is an implied <span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">humas</span>), though several ancient witnesses actually add it. The <span class="greek">πάντα</span> (<span class="translit">panta</span>) takes on an adverbial force in this context (“fully”), intensifying how acquainted the readers are with the following points.</p><p><b>sn</b> That Jude comments on his audience’s prior knowledge of what he is about to tell them (<i>you have been fully informed of these facts</i>) may imply that they were familiar with 2 Peter. In 2 Pet 2:4ff., the same illustrations from the OT are drawn. See the note on the following phrase <i>once for all</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n6500123"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500123">23</a> <p><b>tc</b> The textual history of Jude 5 is quite complex for two separate but overlapping problems. There are different ways to group these. The NA<sup>28</sup> apparatus, for example, lists 13 variants for “(…once for all) that Jesus, having saved the people.” The <b>tc</b> notes will treat the clause separately from its subject. Here the clause will be treated; in the next <b>tc</b> note the subject will be. Some translations take <span class="greek">ἅπαξ</span> (<span class="translit">hapax</span>) with the following clause (thus, “[Jesus,] having saved the people <i>once for all</i>”). Such a translation presupposes that <span class="greek">ἅπαξ</span> is a part of the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) clause. The reading of NA<sup>27</sup>, <span class="greek">πάντα ὅτι</span> [<span class="greek">ὁ</span>]<span class="greek"> κύριος ἅπαξ</span> (<span class="translit">panta hoti</span> [<span class="translit">ho</span>]<span class="translit"> kurios hapax</span>), suggests this interpretation (though with “the Lord” instead of “Jesus”). <span class="greek">ἅπαξ</span> is found before <span class="greek">λαόν</span> (<span class="translit">laon</span>) as part of the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> clause in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C* <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 88 442 630 1241 1243 1505 1611 1739<sup>txt</sup> 1846 1881 2492 co. But the particle is found before the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> clause in most witnesses, including several significant ones (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> A B C<sup>2</sup> 5 33 81 307 436 623 642 1175 1735 [1739<sup>v.l.</sup>] 2344 <span class="apparatus">M</span> vg). What seems best able to explain the various placements of the adverb is that scribes were uncomfortable with <span class="greek">ἅπαξ</span> referring to the readers’ knowledge, feeling it was more appropriate to the theological significance of “saved” (<span class="greek">σώσας</span>, <span class="translit">sōsas</span>). The NA<sup>28</sup> text now has the adverb before the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span>-clause, just as the Greek text behind the NET translation does.</p><p><b>sn</b> In this translation, Jude is stressing that the readers have been informed <i>once for all</i> of the OT illustrations he is about to mention. Where would they get this information? Most likely from having read 2 Peter. Earlier Jude used the same adverb to indicate that these believers had a written record of the faith. This seems to be his implication here, too. Thus, for the second time Jude is appealing to the written documents of the early church as authoritative as opposed to the messages of the false teachers. As the 1st century began to draw to a close, the early church found itself increasingly dependent on the letters and gospels of the apostles and their associates. Once those apostles died, false apostles and false teachers sprang up, like wolves in sheep’s clothing (cf. Acts 20:29-30). To combat this, some of the latest books of the NT stressed the authority of what had been written (so Hebrews, Jude, Ephesians, 1 John). Although these writers anticipated the return of the Lord, they also braced their audiences for a delay of the <i>parousia</i> (the second coming of Christ) by suggesting that when they were gone the NT documents should guide them.</p></p>
<p id="n6500124"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500124">24</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsous</span>, “Jesus”) is deemed too hard by several scholars, since it involves the notion of Jesus acting in the early history of the nation Israel (the NA<sup>27</sup> has “the Lord” instead of “Jesus”). However, not only does this reading enjoy the strongest support from a variety of early witnesses (e.g., A B 33 81 88 322 424<sup>c</sup> 665 915 1241 (1735: “the Lord Jesus”) 1739 1881 2298 2344 vg co eth Or<sup>1739mg</sup> Cyr Hier Bede), but the plethora of variants demonstrate that scribes were uncomfortable with it, for they seemed to exchange <span class="greek">κύριος</span> (<span class="translit">kurios</span>, “Lord”) or <span class="greek">θεός</span> (<span class="translit">theos</span>, “God”) for <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (though <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>72</sup> has the intriguing reading <span class="greek">θεὸς Χριστός</span> [<span class="translit">theos Christos</span>, “God Christ”] for <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span>). As difficult as the reading <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς</span> is, in light of v. 4 and in light of the progress of revelation (Jude being one of the last books in the NT to be composed), it is wholly appropriate. The NA<sup>28</sup> text now also reads <span class="greek">Ιησοῦς</span>. For defense of this reading, see Philipp Bartholomä, “Did Jesus Save the People out of Egypt: A Re-examination of a Textual Problem in Jude 5, ” <i>NovT</i> 50 (2008): 143-58.</p><p><b>sn</b> The construction <i>our Master and Lord, Jesus Christ</i> in v. 4 follows Granville Sharp’s rule (see note on <i>Lord</i>). The construction strongly implies the deity of Christ. This is followed by a statement that <i>Jesus</i> was involved in the salvation (and later judgment) of the Hebrews. He is thus to be identified with the Lord God, Yahweh. Verse 5, then, simply fleshes out what is implicit in v. 4.</p></p>
<p id="n6500125"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “a,” though this is less likely.</p></p>
<p id="n6500126"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the second time.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500127"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.” Verse 6 is a continuation of the same sentence begun in v. 5. Due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6500128"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who did not keep their own domain.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The idea is that certain <i>angels</i> acted improperly, going outside the bounds prescribed by God (<i>their proper domain</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n6500129"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500129">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is an interesting play on words used in this verse. Because the angels did not <i>keep</i> their proper place, Jesus has <i>kept</i> them chained up in another place. The same verb <i>keep</i> is used in v. 1 to describe believers’ status before God and Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n6500130"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500130">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> In 2 Pet 2:4 a less common word for <i>chains</i> is used.</p></p>
<p id="n6500131"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word <span class="greek">ζόφος</span> (<span class="translit">zophos</span>, “utter, deepest darkness”) is used only five times in the NT: two in 2 Peter, two in Jude, and one in Hebrews. Jude 6 parallels 2 Pet 2:4; Jude 13 parallels 2 Pet 2:17.</p></p>
<p id="n6500132"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “locked up” are not in Greek, but are expressed in English as a resumptive point after the double prepositional phrase (“in eternal chains in utter darkness”). </p></p>
<p id="n6500133"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500134"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the towns [or cities] surrounding them.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500135"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “strange flesh.” This phrase has been variously interpreted. It could refer to flesh of another species (such as angels lusting after human flesh). This would aptly describe the sin of the angels, but not easily explain the sin of Sodom and Gomorrah. It could refer to the homosexual practices of the Sodomites, but a difficulty arises from the use of <span class="greek">ἕτερος</span> (<span class="translit">heteros</span>; “strange,” “other”). When this is to be distinguished from <span class="greek">ἄλλος</span> (<span class="translit">allos</span>, “another”) it suggests “another of a different kind.” If so, would that properly describe <i>homo</i>sexual behavior? In response, the language could easily be compact: “pursued flesh <i>other</i> than what was normally pursued.” However, would this find an analogy in the lust of angels (such would imply that angels <i>normally</i> had sexual relations of some sort, but cf. Matt 22:30)? Another alternative is that the focus of the parallel is on the activity of the surrounding cities and the activity of the angels. This is especially plausible since the participles <span class="greek">ἐκπορνεύσασαι</span> (<span class="translit">ekporneusasai</span>, “having indulged in sexual immorality”) and <span class="greek">ἀπελθοῦσαι</span> (<span class="translit">apelthousai</span>, “having pursued”) have concord with “cities” (<span class="greek">πόλεις</span>, <span class="translit">poleis</span>), a feminine plural noun, rather than with Sodom and Gomorrah (both masculine nouns). If so, then their sin would not necessarily have to be homosexuality. However, most likely the feminine participles are used because of <i>constructio ad sensum</i> (construction according to sense). That is, since both Sodom and Gomorrah are cities, the feminine is used to imply that all the cities are involved. The connection with angels thus seems to be somewhat loose: Both angels and Sodom and Gomorrah indulged in heinous sexual immorality. Thus, whether the false teachers indulge in homosexual activity is not the point; mere sexual immorality is enough to condemn them.</p></p>
<p id="n6500136"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the same way as.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500137"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Angels” is not in the Greek text, but the masculine demonstrative pronoun most likely refers back to the angels of v. 6.</p></p>
<p id="n6500138"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> The reference is now to the false teachers.</p></p>
<p id="n6500139"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500139">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “dreaming.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐνυπνιαζόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">enupniazomenoi</span>, “dreaming”) is adverbial to the pronoun <span class="greek">οὗτοι</span> (<span class="translit">houtoi</span>, “these”), though the particular relationship is not clear. It could mean, “while dreaming,” “by dreaming,” or “because of dreaming.” This translation has adopted the last option as Jude’s meaning, partially for syntactical reasons (the causal participle usually precedes the main verb) and partially for contextual reasons (these false teachers must derive their authority from some source, and the dreams provide the most obvious base). The participle <span class="greek">ἐνυπνιαζόμενοι</span> was sometimes used of apocalyptic visions, both of true and false prophets. This seems to be the meaning here.</p></p>
<p id="n6500140"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Most likely, the authority of the Lord is in view. This verse, then, echoes the indictment of v. 4: “they deny our Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500141"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The construction with the three verbs (“defile, “reject,” and “insult”) involves the particles <span class="greek">μέν</span>, <span class="greek">δέ</span>, <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">men</span>, <span class="translit">de</span>, <span class="translit">de</span>). A more literal (and pedantic) translation would be: “on the one hand, they defile the flesh, on the other hand, they reject authority, and on another hand, they insult the glorious ones.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500142"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500142">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The glorious ones</i> refers to angelic beings rather than mere human beings, just as in 2 Pet 2:10 (on which this passage apparently depends). Whether the angelic beings are good or evil, however, is difficult to tell (hence, the translation is left ambiguous). However, both in 2 Pet 2:11 and here, in Jude 9, the wicked angels seem to be in view (for not even Michael insults them). </p></p>
<p id="n6500143"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “even” is not in Greek; it is implied by the height of the contrast.</p></p>
<p id="n6500144"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500144">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> According to Jewish intertestamental literature (such as <i>1 En</i>. 20), <i>Michael</i> was one of seven archangels.</p></p>
<p id="n6500145"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> The sentence structure is a bit different in Greek. Literally it reads: “But Michael the archangel, when arguing with the devil and disputing.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500146"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “they should naturally comprehend.” The present tense in this context may have a conative force. </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>They instinctively comprehend</i>. Like irrational animals, these false teachers do grasp one thing—the instinctive behavior of animals in heat. R. Bauckham (<i>Jude, 2 Peter</i> [WBC], 63) notes that “Though they claim to be guided by special spiritual insight gained in heavenly revelations, they are in fact following the sexual instincts which they share with the animals.” Jude’s focus is somewhat different from Peter’s: Peter argued that, like irrational animals who are born to be caught and killed, these men will be destroyed when destroying others (2 Pet 2:12). Jude, however, does not mention the destruction of animals, just that these false teachers will be destroyed for mimicking them.</p></p>
<p id="n6500147"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “they have gone the way of Cain.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500148"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500148">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for wages.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500149"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἐκχέω</span> (<span class="translit">ekcheō</span>) normally means “pour out.” Here, in the passive, it occasionally has a reflexive idea, as BDAG 312 s.v. 3. suggests (with extra-biblical examples). </p></p>
<p id="n6500150"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500151"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500151">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.” See note on “perish” later in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n6500152"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500152">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> The three verbs in this verse are all aorist indicative (“have gone down,” “have abandoned,” “have perished”). Although the first and second could be considered constative or ingressive, the last is almost surely proleptic (referring to the certainty of their future judgment). Although it may seem odd that a proleptic aorist is so casually connected to other aorists with a different syntactical force, it is not unparalleled (cf. Rom 8:30).</p></p>
<p id="n6500153"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500153">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these are the men who are.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500154"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500154">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though <span class="greek">σπιλάδες</span> (<span class="translit">spilades</span>) is frequently translated “blemishes” or “stains,” such is actually a translation of the Greek word <span class="greek">σπίλοι</span> (<span class="translit">spiloi</span>). The two words are quite similar, especially in their root or lexical forms (<span class="greek">σπιλάς</span> [<span class="translit">spilas</span>] and <span class="greek">σπίλος</span> [<span class="translit">spilos</span>] respectively). Some scholars have suggested that <span class="greek">σπιλάδες</span> in this context means the same thing as <span class="greek">σπίλοι</span>. But such could be the case only by a stretch of the imagination (see BDAG 938 s.v. <span class="greek">σπιλάς</span> for discussion). Others suggest that Jude’s spelling was in error (which also is doubtful). One reason for the tension is that in the parallel passage, 2 Pet 2:13, the term used is indeed <span class="greek">σπίλος</span>. And if either Jude used 2 Peter or 2 Peter used Jude, one would expect to see the same word. Jude, however, may have changed the wording for the sake of a subtle wordplay. The word <span class="greek">σπιλάς</span> was often used of a mere rock, though it normally was associated with a rock along the shore or one jutting out in the water. Thus, the false teachers would appear as “rocks”—as pillars in the community (cf. Matt 16:18; Gal 2:9), when in reality if a believer got too close to them his faith would get shipwrecked. Some suggest that <span class="greek">σπιλάδες</span> here means “hidden rocks.” Though this meaning is attested for the word, it is inappropriate in this context, since these false teachers are anything but hidden. They are dangerous because undiscerning folks get close to them, thinking they are rocks and pillars, when they are really dangerous reefs.</p></p>
<p id="n6500155"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500155">55</a> <p><b>tc</b> Several witnesses (A C<sup>vid</sup> 88 1243 1846 2492 <i>al</i>), influenced by the parallel in 2 Pet 2:13, read <span class="greek">ἀπάταις</span> (<span class="translit">apatais</span>, “deceptions”) for <span class="greek">ἀγάπαις</span> (<span class="translit">agapais</span>, “love-feasts”) in v. 12. However, <span class="greek">ἀγάπαις</span> has much stronger and earlier support and makes much better sense in the context; it should therefore be considered authentic.</p><p><b>sn</b> The danger of the false teachers at the <i>love feasts</i> would be especially pernicious, for the love feasts of the early church involved the Lord’s Supper, worship, and instruction.</p></p>
<p id="n6500156"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500156">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “fearlessly.” The term in this context, however, is decidedly negative. The implication is that these false teachers ate the Lord’s Supper without regarding the sanctity of the meal. Cf. 1 Cor 11:17-22. </p></p>
<p id="n6500157"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500157">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “shepherding themselves.” The verb <span class="greek">ποιμαίνω</span> (<span class="translit">poimainō</span>) means “shepherd, nurture [the flock].” But these men, rather than tending to the flock of God, nurture only themselves. They thus fall under the condemnation Paul uttered when writing to the Corinthians: “For when it comes time to eat [the Lord’s Supper,] each one goes ahead with his own meal” (1 Cor 11:21). Above all, the love-feast was intended to be a shared meal in which all ate and all felt welcome.</p></p>
<p id="n6500158"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500158">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> “They are” is not in Greek, but resumes the thought begun at the front of v. 12. There is no period before “They are.” English usage requires breaking this into more than one sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n6500159"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500159">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Cf. 2 Pet 2:17. Jude’s emphasis is slightly different (instead of waterless springs, they are waterless clouds). </p></p>
<p id="n6500160"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500160">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> The imagery portraying the false teachers as <i>autumn trees without fruit</i> has to do with their lack of productivity. Recall the statement to the same effect by Jesus in Matt 7:16-20, in which false prophets will be known by their fruits. Like waterless clouds full of false hope, these trees do not yield any harvest even though it is expected. </p></p>
<p id="n6500161"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500161">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having died twice.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Twice dead</i> probably has no relevance to the tree metaphor, but has great applicability to these false teachers. As in Rev 20:6, those who die twice are those who die physically and spiritually. The aphorism is true: “born once, die twice; born twice, die once” (cf. Rev 20:5; John 3, 11).</p></p>
<p id="n6500162"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500162">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “wild waves of the sea.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500163"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500163">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “foaming, causing to foam.” The verb form is intensive and causative. BDAG 360 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπαφρίζω</span> suggests the meaning “to cause to splash up like froth, <i>cause to foam</i>,” or, in this context, “<i>waves casting up their own shameless deeds like (dirty) foam</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500164"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500164">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “shames, shameful things.” It is uncertain whether shameful deeds or shameful words are in view. Either way, the picture has taken a decided turn: Though waterless clouds and fruitless trees may promise good things, but deliver nothing, wild sea-waves are portents of filth spewed forth from the belly of the sea.</p></p>
<p id="n6500165"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500165">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> The imagery of a star seems to fit the nautical theme that Jude is developing. Stars were of course the guides to sailors at night, just as teachers are responsible to lead the flock through a benighted world. But false teachers, as <i>wayward stars</i>, are not fixed and hence offer unreliable, even disastrous guidance. They are thus both the dangerous reefs on which the ships could be destroyed and the false guides, leading them into these rocks. There is a special irony that these lights will be snuffed out, reserved for the darkest <i>depths of eternal darkness</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n6500166"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500166">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “utter darkness of darkness for eternity.” See note on the word “utter” in v. 6.</p></p>
<p id="n6500167"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500167">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the seventh from Adam.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The genealogical count is inclusive, counting <i>Adam</i> as the first, for <i>Enoch</i> is really the sixth in descent from Adam (Adam, Seth, Enosh, Cainan, Mahalalel, Jared, Enoch). In this way, the picture of perfection/completion was retained (for the number seven is often used for perfection or completion in the Bible) starting with Adam and concluding with Enoch.</p></p>
<p id="n6500168"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500168">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “against them.” The dative <span class="greek">τούτοις</span> (<span class="translit">toutois</span>) is a <i>dativus incommodi</i> (dative of disadvantage). </p></p>
<p id="n6500169"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500169">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has come,” a proleptic aorist.</p></p>
<p id="n6500170"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500170">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ten thousands.” The word <span class="greek">μυριάς</span> (<span class="translit">murias</span>), from which the English <i>myriad</i> is derived, means “ten thousand.” In the plural it means “ten thousands.” This would mean, minimally, 20,000 (a multiple of ten thousand). At the same time, the term was often used in apocalyptic literature to represent simply a rather large number, without any attempt to be specific.</p></p>
<p id="n6500171"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500171">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “against” (<span class="greek">κατά</span> [<span class="translit">kata</span>] + genitive). English usage is satisfied with “on” at this point, but the parallel is lost in the translation to some degree, for the end of v. 15 says that this judgment is meted out on these sinners because they spoke <i>against him</i> (<span class="greek">κατά</span> + genitive).</p></p>
<p id="n6500172"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500172">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “soul.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500173"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500173">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of all their works of ungodliness.” The adverb “thoroughly” is part of the following verb “have committed.” See note on verb “committed” later in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n6500174"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500174">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb in Greek does not simply mean “have committed,” but “have committed in an ungodly way.” The verb <span class="greek">ἀσεβέω</span> (<span class="translit">asebeō</span>) is cognate to the noun <span class="greek">ἀσέβεια</span> (<span class="translit">asebeia</span>, “ungodliness”). There is no easy way to express this in English, since English does not have a single word that means the same thing. Nevertheless, the tenor of v. 15 is plainly seen, regardless of the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6500175"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500175">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> An apparent quotation from <i>1 En</i>. 1:9. There is some doubt as to whether Jude is actually quoting from the text of <i>1 Enoch</i>; the text here in Jude differs in some respects from the extant text of this pseudepigraphic book. It is sometimes suggested that Jude may instead have been quoting from oral tradition which had roots older than the written text.</p></p>
<p id="n6500176"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500176">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> “And” is not in Greek, but is supplied for the sake of English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6500177"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500177">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “going.” Though the participle is anarthrous, so also is the subject. Thus, the participle could be either adverbial or adjectival.</p></p>
<p id="n6500178"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500178">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “(who go/going) according to their own lusts.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500179"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500179">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and their mouth speaks bombastic things.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>They give bombastic speeches</i>. The idiom of opening one’s mouth in the NT often implied a public oration from a teacher or one in authority. Cf. Matt 5:2; Luke 4:22; Acts 1:16; 3:18; 10:34; Eph 6:19; Rev 13:5-6.</p></p>
<p id="n6500180"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500180">80</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Enchanting folks</i> (<i>Grk</i> “awing faces”) refers to the fact that the speeches of these false teachers are powerful and seductive. </p></p>
<p id="n6500181"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500181">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to their own advantage.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500182"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500182">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “words.” In conjunction with <span class="greek">προεῖπον</span> (<span class="translit">proeipon</span>), however, the meaning of the construction is that the apostles uttered prophecies.</p></p>
<p id="n6500183"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500183">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> This verse parallels 2 Pet 3:2 both conceptually and in much of the verbiage. There is one important difference, however: In 2 Pet 3:2 the prophets and apostles speak; here, just the <i>apostles</i> speak. This makes good sense if Jude is using 2 Peter as his main source and is urging his readers to go back to the authoritative writings, both OT and now especially NT. </p></p>
<p id="n6500184"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500184">84</a> <p><b>tc</b> The <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) before <span class="greek">ἐπ᾿ ἐσχάτου χρόνου</span> (<span class="translit">ep eschatou chronou</span>, “at the end of time”), found in the NA<sup>27</sup> text, can either be translated as “that” or left untranslated as a marker of direct discourse. The NA<sup>28</sup> has dropped the <span class="greek">ὅτι</span>, though with a diamond preceding it in the apparatus indicating a toss-up on the initial wording. Without the conjunction, direct discourse is surely meant, and with it it is just as likely as indirect discourse. The translation above makes no decision on the presence or absence of the conjunction, but renders either variant as direct discourse.</p></p>
<p id="n6500185"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500185">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “be.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500186"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500186">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going according to their own desires of ungodliness.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Jude cites 2 Pet 3:3, changing a few of the words among other things, cleaning up the syntax, conforming it to Hellenistic style.</p></p>
<p id="n6500187"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500187">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these are the ones who cause divisions.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500188"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500188">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “natural,” that is, living on the level of instincts, not on a spiritual level (the same word occurs in 1 Cor 2:14 as a description of nonbelievers).</p></p>
<p id="n6500189"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500189">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not having [the] Spirit.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>devoid of the Spirit</i> may well indicate Jude’s and Peter’s assessment of the spiritual status of the false teachers. Those who do not have the Spirit are clearly not saved.</p></p>
<p id="n6500190"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500190">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participles in v. 20 have been variously interpreted. Some treat them imperativally or as attendant circumstance to the imperative in v. 21 (“maintain”): “build yourselves up…pray.” But they do not follow the normal contours of either the imperatival or attendant circumstance participles, rendering this unlikely. A better option is to treat them as the <i>means</i> by which the readers are to maintain themselves in the love of God. This both makes eminently good sense and fits the structural patterns of instrumental participles elsewhere.</p></p>
<p id="n6500191"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500191">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “keep.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500192"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500192">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “waiting for.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500193"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500193">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “unto eternal life.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500194"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500194">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and save.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500195"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500195">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and have mercy.”</p></p>
<p id="n6500196"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500196">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with fear.” But as this contrasts with <span class="greek">ἀφόβως</span> (<span class="translit">aphobōs</span>) in v. 12 (<i>without reverence</i>), the posture of the false teachers, it most likely refers to reverence for God.</p><p><b>sn</b> Joining a <i>fear of God</i> to <i>mercy</i> is an important balance when involved in disciplinary action. On the one hand, being merciful without fear can turn to unwarranted sympathy for the individual, absolving him of personal responsibility, but fearing God without showing mercy can turn into personal judgment and condemnation.</p></p>
<p id="n6500197"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500197">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> The imagery here suggests that the things close to the sinners are contaminated by them, presumably during the process of sinning.</p></p>
<p id="n6500198"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500198">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hating even the tunic spotted by the flesh.” The “flesh” in this instance could refer to the body or to the sin nature. It makes little difference in one sense: Jude is thinking primarily of sexual sins, which are borne of the sin nature and manifest themselves in inappropriate deeds done with the body. At the same time, he is <i>not</i> saying that the body is intrinsically bad, a view held by the opponents of Christianity. Hence, it is best to see “flesh” as referring to the sin nature here and the language as metaphorical.</p></p>
<p id="n6500199"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n6500199">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> The construction in Greek is a double accusative object-complement. “You” is the object and “free from falling” is the adjectival complement. </p></p>
<p id="n65001100"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n65001100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with rejoicing.” The prepositional clause is placed after “his glorious presence” in Greek, but most likely goes with “cause you to stand.”</p></p>
<p id="n65001101"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n65001101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> The construction in Greek is a double accusative object-complement. “You” is the object and “without blemish” is the adjectival complement. </p></p>
<p id="n65001102"><a href="file1232.xhtml#n65001102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the presence of his glory,” “before his glory.”</p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
