<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 14</h2>
<p id="n450141"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n450141">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “over opinions.” The qualifier “differing” has been supplied to clarify the meaning.</p></p>
<p id="n450142"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n450142">2</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially Western and Byzantine (D F G L 048 33 1739 1175 1241 1505 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt), read <span class="greek">θεός</span> (<span class="translit">theos</span>, “God”) in place of <span class="greek">κύριος</span> (<span class="translit">kurios</span>, “Lord”) here. However, <span class="greek">κύριος</span> is found in many of the most significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> co), and <span class="greek">θεός</span> looks to be an assimilation to <span class="greek">θεός</span> in v. 3.</p></p>
<p id="n450143"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n450143">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For one judges day from day, and one judges all days.”</p></p>
<p id="n450144"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n450144">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n450145"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n450145">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But why do you judge your brother?” The introductory phrase has been supplied in the translation to clarify whom Paul is addressing, i.e., the “weak” Christian who eats only vegetables (see vv. 2-3). The author uses the singular pronoun here to rhetorically address one person, but the plural has been used in the translation for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n450146"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n450146">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Or again, why do you despise your brother?” The introductory phrase has been supplied in the translation to clarify whom Paul is addressing, i.e., the “strong” Christian who eats everything (see vv. 2-3). The author uses the singular pronoun here to rhetorically address one person, but the plural has been used in the translation for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n450147"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n450147">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>judgment seat</i> (<span class="greek">βῆμα</span>, <span class="translit">bēma</span>) was a raised platform mounted by steps and sometimes furnished with a seat, used by officials in addressing an assembly or making pronouncements, often on judicial matters. The judgment seat was a familiar item in Greco-Roman culture, often located in the <i>agora</i>, the public square or marketplace in the center of a city.</p></p>
<p id="n450148"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n450148">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 45:23.</p></p>
<p id="n450149"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n450149">9</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The words “to God” are absent from some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B F G 6 630 1739 1881) but are found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0209 33 1175 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy co. External evidence somewhat favors their inclusion since Alexandrian, Western, and Byzantine <span class="smcaps">mss</span> are well represented. From an internal standpoint, however, it is easy to see the words as a scribal gloss intended to clarify the referent, especially as a reinforcement to the quotation of Isa 45:23 in v. 11. Not only that, but the abrupt ending of the verse without “to God” is harsh, both in Greek and in English. In this instance, the internal considerations seem overwhelming on the side of the omission. At the same time, English stylistic needs require the words and they have been put into the translation, even though they are most likely not original. NA<sup>28</sup> places the words in brackets, indicating doubt as to their authenticity.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “each of us is accountable to God.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501410"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n4501410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brother.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501411"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n4501411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brother.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501412"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n4501412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on account of food.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501413"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n4501413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to love.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501414"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n4501414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do not let your good.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501415"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n4501415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by men,” but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is generic here (“people”) since the contrast in context is between God and humanity.</p></p>
<p id="n4501416"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n4501416">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here <i>clean</i> refers to food being ceremonially clean.</p></p>
<p id="n4501417"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n4501417">17</a> <p><b>tc</b> A large number of <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, some of them quite significant (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> B D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0209 33 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sa), read “or to be offended or to be made weak” after “to stumble.” The shorter reading “to stumble” is found only in Alexandrian <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A C 048 81 945 1506 1739 bo). Although external evidence favors inclusion, internal evidence points to a scribal expansion, perhaps reminiscent of 1 Cor 8:11-13. The shorter reading is therefore preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4501418"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n4501418">18</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several significant Alexandrian witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C 048) have the relative pronoun <span class="greek">ἥν</span> (<span class="translit">hēn</span>, “the faith <i>that</i> you have”) at this juncture, but D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 1505 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat co lack it. Without the pronoun, the clause is more ambiguous (either “Keep the faith [that] you have between yourself and God” or “Do you have faith? Keep it between yourself and God”). The pronoun thus looks to be a motivated reading, created to clarify the meaning of the text. Even though it is found in the better witnesses, in this instance internal evidence should be given preference. NA<sup>28</sup> places the word in brackets, indicating some doubt as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4501419"><a href="file1105.xhtml#n4501419">19</a> <p><b>tc</b> Some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> insert 16:25-27 at this point. See the <b>tc</b> note at 16:25 for more information.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
