<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Thessalonians 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Thessalonians<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Day of the Lord</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> Now on the topic of times and seasons,<sup><a id="n520051" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n520051">1</a></sup> brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n520052" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n520052">2</a></sup> you have no need for anything to be written to you. <span class="verse">5:2</span> For you know quite well that the day of the Lord<sup><a id="n520053" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n520053">3</a></sup> will come in the same way as a thief in the night.<sup><a id="n520054" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n520054">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:3</span> Now when<sup><a id="n520055" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n520055">5</a></sup> they are saying, “There is peace and security,”<sup><a id="n520056" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n520056">6</a></sup> then sudden destruction comes on them, like labor pains<sup><a id="n520057" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n520057">7</a></sup> on a pregnant woman, and they will surely not escape. <span class="verse">5:4</span> But you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n520058" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n520058">8</a></sup> are not in the darkness for the day to overtake you like a thief would. <span class="verse">5:5</span> For you all are sons of the light and sons of the day. We are not of the night nor of the darkness. <span class="verse">5:6</span> So then we must not sleep as the rest, but must stay alert and sober. <span class="verse">5:7</span> For those who sleep, sleep at night and those who get drunk are drunk at night. <span class="verse">5:8</span> But since we are of the day, we must stay sober <i>by putting on the breastplate</i><sup><a id="n520059" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n520059">9</a></sup> of faith and love and as <i>a helmet</i> our hope <i>for salvation</i>.<sup><a id="n5200510" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200510">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:9</span> For God did not destine us for wrath<sup><a id="n5200511" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200511">11</a></sup> but for gaining salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">5:10</span> He died<sup><a id="n5200512" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200512">12</a></sup> for us so that whether we are alert or asleep<sup><a id="n5200513" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200513">13</a></sup> we will come to life together with him. <span class="verse">5:11</span> Therefore encourage one another and build up each other, just as you are in fact doing. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Final Instructions</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:12</span> Now we ask you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5200514" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200514">14</a></sup> to acknowledge those who labor among you and preside over you in the Lord and admonish you, <span class="verse">5:13</span> and to esteem them most highly in love because of their work. Be at peace among yourselves. <span class="verse">5:14</span> And we urge you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5200515" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200515">15</a></sup> admonish the undisciplined, comfort the discouraged, help the weak, be patient toward all. <span class="verse">5:15</span> See that no one pays back evil for evil to anyone, but always pursue what is good for one another and for all. <span class="verse">5:16</span> Always rejoice, <span class="verse">5:17</span> constantly pray, <span class="verse">5:18</span> in everything give thanks. For this is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">5:19</span> Do not extinguish the Spirit. <span class="verse">5:20</span> Do not treat prophecies with contempt. <span class="verse">5:21</span> But examine all things; hold fast to what is good. <span class="verse">5:22</span> Stay away from every form of evil. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Conclusion</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:23</span> Now may the God of peace himself make you completely holy and may your spirit and soul and body be kept entirely blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">5:24</span> He who calls you is trustworthy, and he will in fact do this.<sup><a id="n5200516" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200516">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:25</span> Brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5200517" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200517">17</a></sup> pray for us too. <span class="verse">5:26</span> Greet all the brothers and sisters<sup><a id="n5200518" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200518">18</a></sup> with a holy kiss. <span class="verse">5:27</span> I call on you solemnly in the Lord<sup><a id="n5200519" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200519">19</a></sup> to have this letter read to all the brothers and sisters.<sup><a id="n5200520" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200520">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:28</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.<sup><a id="n5200521" href="file1168_notes.xhtml#n5200521">21</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>