<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 15</h2>
<p id="n660151"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n660151">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660152"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n660152">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seven plagues—the last ones.”</p></p>
<p id="n660153"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n660153">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660154"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n660154">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Rev 4:6 where the <i>sea of glass</i> was mentioned previously.</p></p>
<p id="n660155"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n660155">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “had been victorious over”; traditionally, “had overcome.”</p></p>
<p id="n660156"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n660156">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of his name, standing.” A new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the words “They were.”</p></p>
<p id="n660157"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n660157">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “on.” The preposition <span class="greek">ἐπί</span> (<span class="translit">epi</span>) with the accusative case could mean “on, at, by, near”; given the nature of this scene appearing in a vision, it is difficult to know precisely which the author of Revelation intended. See BDAG 363 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπί</span> <span class="greek">1</span>.c.<span class="greek">γ</span>, “<i>At, by, near someone</i> or <i>someth</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n660158"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n660158">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “harps of God.” The phrase <span class="greek">τοῦ θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">tou theou</span>) has been translated as a genitive of agency.</p></p>
<p id="n660159"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n660159">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n6601510"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6601511"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n6601512"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this word BDAG 755 s.v. <span class="greek">παντοκράτωρ</span> states, “the <i>Almighty, All-Powerful, Omnipotent</i> (<i>One</i>) only of God…(<span class="greek">ὁ</span>)<span class="greek"> κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ π</span>.…Rv 1:8; 4:8; 11:17; 15:3; 16:7; 21:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601513"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “righteous,” although the context favors justice as the theme.</p></p>
<p id="n6601514"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601514">14</a> <p><b>tc</b> Certain <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>47</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*<sup>,2</sup> C 1006 1611 1841) read “ages” (<span class="greek">αἰώνων</span>, <span class="translit">aiōnōn</span>) instead of “nations” (<span class="greek">ἐθνῶν</span>, <span class="translit">ethnōn</span>), which itself is supported by several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> A 051 <span class="apparatus">M</span>). The ms evidence seems to be fairly balanced, though <span class="greek">αἰώνων</span> has somewhat better support. The replacement of “ages” with “nations” is possibly a scribal attempt to harmonize this verse with the use of “nations” in the following verse. On the other hand, the idea of “nations” fits well with v. 4 and it may be that “ages” is a scribal attempt to assimilate this text to 1 Tim 1:17: “the king of the ages” (<span class="greek">βασιλεὺς τῶν αἰώνων</span>, <span class="translit">basileus tōn aiōnōn</span>). The decision is a difficult one since both scenarios deal well with the evidence, though the verbal parallel with 1 Tim 1:17 is exact while the parallel with v. 4 is not. The term “king” occurs 17 other times (most occurrences refer to earthly kings) in Revelation and it is not used with either “ages” or “nations” apart from this verse. Probably “nations” should be considered the earlier reading due to the influence of 1 Tim 1:17 on this passage.</p></p>
<p id="n6601515"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and praise.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Jeremiah 10:7 probably stands behind the idea of fearing God, and Psalm 86:9-10 stands behind the ideas of glorifying God, his uniqueness, and the nations coming to worship him. Many other OT passages also speak about the nations “coming to his temple” to worship (Isa 2:2-3; 49:22-23; 66:23-24; Micah 4:2; Zech 8:20-22). See G. K. Beale, <i>Revelation</i> (NIGTC), 796-97.</p></p>
<p id="n6601516"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601516">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Because you alone are holy</i>. In the Greek text the sentence literally reads “because alone holy.” Three points can be made in connection with John’s language here: (1) Omitting the second person, singular verb “you are” lays stress on the attribute of God’s holiness. (2) The juxtaposition of <i>alone</i> with <i>holy</i> stresses the unique nature of God’s holiness and complete “otherness” in relationship to his creation. It is not just moral purity which is involved in the use of the term <i>holy</i>, though it certainly includes that. It is also the pervasive OT idea that although God is deeply involved in the governing of his creation, he is to be regarded as separate and distinct from it. (3) John’s use of the term <i>holy</i> is also intriguing since it is the term <span class="greek">ὅσιος</span> (<span class="translit">hosios</span>) and not the more common NT term <span class="greek">ἅγιος</span> (<span class="translit">hagios</span>). The former term evokes images of Christ’s messianic status in early Christian preaching. Both Peter in Acts 2:27 and Paul in Acts 13:35 apply Psalm 16:10 (LXX) to Jesus, referring to him as the “holy one” (<span class="greek">ὅσιος</span>). It is also the key term in Acts 13:34 (Isa 55:3 [LXX]) where it refers to the “holy blessings” (i.e., forgiveness and justification) brought about through Jesus in fulfillment of Davidic promise. Thus, in Rev 15:3-4, when John refers to God as “holy,” using the term <span class="greek">ὅσιος</span> in a context where the emphasis is on both God and Christ, there might be an implicit connection between divinity and the Messiah. This is bolstered by the fact that the Lamb is referred to in other contexts as the King of Kings and Lord of Lords (cf. 1:5; 17:14; 19:16 and perhaps 11:15; G. K. Beale, <i>Revelation</i> [NIGTC], 796-97).</p></p>
<p id="n6601517"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “all the Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601518"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “your sentences of condemnation.” On <span class="greek">δικαίωμα</span> (<span class="translit">dikaiōma</span>) in this context BDAG 249 s.v. 2. states, “<i>righteous deed</i>…<span class="greek">δι᾿ ἑνὸς δικαιώματος</span> (opp. <span class="greek">παράπτωμα</span>) Ro 5:18.—B 1:2 (cp. Wengst, Barnabas-brief 196, n.4); Rv 15:4 (here perh.= ‘sentence of condemnation’ [cp. Pla., Leg. 9, 864e; ins fr. Asia Minor: LBW 41, 2 [<span class="greek">κατὰ</span>]<span class="greek"> τὸ δι</span>[<span class="greek">καί</span>]<span class="greek">ωμα τὸ κυρω</span>[<span class="greek">θέν</span>]= ‘acc. to the sentence which has become valid’]; difft. Wengst, s. above); 19:8.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601519"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601520"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 928 s.v. <span class="greek">σκηνή</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span> states, “<span class="greek">ἡ σκηνὴ τοῦ μαρτυρίου</span> the <i>Tabernacle</i> or <i>Tent of Testimony</i> (Ex 27:21; 29:4; Lev 1:1; Num 1:1 and oft.…) Ac 7:44; 1 Cl 43:2, 5, ” and then continues in section 2 to state, “Rv 15:5 speaks of a <span class="greek">ναὸς τῆς σκηνῆς τοῦ μαρτυρίου ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ</span>. God’s <span class="greek">σκ</span>.= <i>dwelling</i> is in heaven 13:6, and will some time be among humans 21:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601521"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple of the tent of the testimony” (<span class="greek">ὁ ναός τῆς σκηνῆς τοῦ μαρτυρίου</span>, <span class="translit">ho naos tēs skēnēs tou marturiou</span>). The genitive “of the tent” is probably an appositional genitive and should be rendered as “the temple, which is the tent.” The entire expression, then, would be “the temple which is the tent of testimony,” that is, “the heavenly equivalent of the tent or tabernacle that was with Israel in the wilderness” (G. K. Beale, <i>Revelation</i> [NIGTC], 801-2). </p><p><b>sn</b> In the OT the expression “tent of the testimony” occurs frequently (130 times in Exodus through Deuteronomy). The “testimony” refers to the ten commandments, i.e., the revelation of the righteous will of God (Exod 16:34; 25:21; 31:18; 32:15; 40:24). It is little wonder that the wrath of God upon an unrighteous, lawbreaking humanity follows in John’s description.</p></p>
<p id="n6601522"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “wide golden sashes,” but these would not be diagonal, as some modern sashes are, but horizontal. The Greek term can refer to a wide band of cloth or leather worn on the outside of one’s clothing (L&amp;N 6.178).</p></p>
<p id="n6601523"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601524"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “anger.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601525"><a href="file1248.xhtml#n6601525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “power, and no one.” A new sentence was started here in the translation. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “thus” to indicate the implied result of the temple being filled with smoke.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
