<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Ephesians 5</h2>
<p id="n490051"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n490051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “become.”</p></p>
<p id="n490052"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n490052">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “walk.” The NT writers often used the verb “walk” (<span class="greek">περιπατέω</span>, <span class="translit">peripateō</span>) to refer to ethical conduct (cf. Rom 8:4; Gal 5:16; Col 4:5). </p></p>
<p id="n490053"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n490053">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> A number of significant witnesses have <span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">humas</span>, “you”; e.g., <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*<sup>,2b</sup> A B P 0159 81 1175 <i>al</i> it co as well as several fathers). Other, equally valuable witnesses read <span class="greek">ἡμᾶς</span> (<span class="translit">hēmas</span>, “us”; <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2a</sup> D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 33 1505 1739 1881 2464 <i>al</i> lat sy). It is possible that <span class="greek">ἡμᾶς</span> was accidentally introduced via homoioarcton with the previous word (<span class="greek">ἠγάπησεν</span>, <span class="translit">ēgapēsen</span>). On the other hand, <span class="greek">ὑμᾶς</span> may have been motivated by the preceding <span class="greek">ὑμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">humin</span>) in 4:32 and second person verbs in 5:1, 2. Further, the flow of argument seems to require the first person pronoun. A decision is difficult to make, but the first person pronoun has a slightly greater probability of being authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n490054"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n490054">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “an offering and sacrifice to God as a smell of fragrance.” The first expression, <span class="greek">προσφορὰν καὶ θυσίαν</span> (<span class="translit">prosphoran kai thusian</span>), is probably a hendiadys and has been translated such that “sacrificial” modifies “offering.” The second expression, <span class="greek">εἰς ὀσμὴν εὐωδίας</span> (<span class="translit">eis osmēn euōdias</span>, “as a smell of fragrance”) has been translated as “a fragrant offering”; see BDAG 728-29 s.v. <span class="greek">ὀσμή</span> 2. Putting these two together in a clear fashion in English yields the translation: “a sacrificial and fragrant offering to God.”</p></p>
<p id="n490055"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n490055">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “But” translates the <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) in a contrastive way in light of the perfect obedience of Jesus in vv. 1-2 and the vices mentioned in v. 3.</p></p>
<p id="n490056"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n490056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all impurity.” </p></p>
<p id="n490057"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n490057">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “just as is fitting for saints.” The <span class="greek">καθώς</span> (<span class="translit">kathōs</span>) was rendered with “as” and the sense is causal, i.e., “for” or “because.” The negative particle “not” (“for these are <i>not</i> proper for the saints”) in this clause was supplied in English so as to make the sense very clear, i.e., that these vices are <i>not</i> befitting of those who name the name of Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n490058"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n490058">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “be knowing this.” See also 2 Pet 1:20 for a similar phrase: <span class="greek">τοῦτο πρῶτον γινώσκοντες</span> (<span class="translit">touto prōton ginōskontes</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n490059"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n490059">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>sons of disobedience</i> is a Semitic idiom that means “people characterized by disobedience.” In this context it refers to “all those who are disobedient.” Cf. Eph 2:2-3.</p></p>
<p id="n4900510"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive <span class="greek">αὐτῶν</span> (<span class="translit">autōn</span>) has been translated as a genitive of association because of its use with <span class="greek">συμμέτοχοι</span> (<span class="translit">summetochoi</span>)—a verb which implies association in the <span class="greek">σύν-</span> (<span class="translit">sun-</span>) prefix. </p></p>
<p id="n4900511"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb “you are” is implied in the Greek text, but is supplied in the English translation to make it clear. </p></p>
<p id="n4900512"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Walk,” a common biblical idiom for one’s conduct of life.</p></p>
<p id="n4900513"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900513">13</a> <p><b>tc</b> Several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175* 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> (<span class="translit">pneumatos</span>, “Spirit”) instead of <span class="greek">φωτός</span> (<span class="translit">phōtos</span>, “light”). Although most today regard <span class="greek">φωτός</span> as obviously the reading of the initial text (UBS<sup>5</sup> gives it an “A” rating), a case could be made that <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> is what the author wrote. First, although this is largely a Byzantine reading (D<sup>2</sup> often, if not normally, assimilates to the Byzantine text), <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> gives the reading much greater credibility. Internally, the <span class="greek">φωτός</span> at the end of v. 8 could have lined up above the <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> in v. 9 in a scribe’s exemplar, thus occasioning dittography. (It is interesting to note that in both <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>49</sup> and <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> the two instances of <span class="greek">φωτός</span> line up.) However, written in a contracted form, as a <i>nomen sacrum</i> (<span class="uncial">pMnMs</span>)—a practice found even in the earliest <span class="smcaps">mss</span>—<span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> would not have been easily confused with <span class="uncial">fwtos</span> (there being only the last letter to occasion homoioteleuton rather than the last three). Further, the external evidence for <span class="greek">φωτός</span> is quite compelling (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>49</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B D* F G P 33 81 1175<sup>c</sup> 1739 1881 2464 latt co). It is thus doubtful that the early and widespread witnesses all mistook <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> for <span class="greek">φωτός</span>. In addition, <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span> can be readily explained as harking back to Gal 5:22 (“the fruit of the Spirit”). Thus, on balance, <span class="greek">φωτός</span> appears to be autographic, giving rise to the reading <span class="greek">πνεύματος</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4900514"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in.” The idea is that the fruit of the light is “expressed in” or “consists of.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900515"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 255 s.v. <span class="greek">δοκιμάζω</span> 1 translates <span class="greek">δοκιμάζοντες</span> (<span class="translit">dokimazontes</span>) in Eph 5:10 as “try to learn.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900516"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek conjunction <span class="greek">καὶ</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) seems to be functioning here ascensively, (i.e., “even”), but is difficult to render in this context using good English. It may read something like: “but rather even expose them!” </p></p>
<p id="n4900517"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “rather even expose.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900518"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">τὰ</span>…<span class="greek">γινόμενα</span> (<span class="translit">ta</span>…<span class="translit">ginomena</span>) usually refers to “things happening” or “things which are,” but with the following genitive phrase <span class="greek">ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν</span> (<span class="translit">hup</span>’ <span class="translit">autōn</span>), which indicates agency, the idea seems to be “things being done.” This passive construction was translated as an active one to simplify the English style. </p></p>
<p id="n4900519"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900519">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> The following passage has been typeset as poetry because many scholars regard this passage as poetic or hymnic. These terms are used broadly to refer to the genre of writing, not to the content. There are two broad criteria for determining if a passage is poetic or hymnic: “(a) <i>stylistic:</i> a certain rhythmical lilt when the passages are read aloud, the presence of <i>parallelismus membrorum</i> (i.e., an arrangement into couplets), the semblance of some metre, and the presence of rhetorical devices such as alliteration, <i>chiasmus</i>, and antithesis; and (b) <i>linguistic:</i> an unusual vocabulary, particularly the presence of theological terms, which is different from the surrounding context” (P. T. O’Brien, <i>Philippians</i> [NIGTC], 188-89). Classifying a passage as hymnic or poetic is important because understanding this genre can provide keys to interpretation. However, not all scholars agree that the above criteria are present in this passage, so the decision to typeset it as poetry should be viewed as a tentative decision about its genre.</p></p>
<p id="n4900520"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Rise up.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900521"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The articular nominative participle <span class="greek">ὁ καθεύδων</span> (<span class="translit">ho katheudōn</span>) is probably functioning as a nominative for vocative. To reflect this, it has been translated as “O sleeper.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900522"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900522">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> A composite quotation, possibly from Isa 26:19; 51:17; 52:1; and 60:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4900523"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> “become wise by understanding”; <i>Grk</i> “understanding.” The imperative “be wise” is apparently implied by the construction of vv. 15-21. See the following text-critical note for discussion.</p></p>
<p id="n4900524"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900524">24</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The best witnesses read the imperative here (so <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B P 0278 33 81 1739 <i>pc</i>). The participle is found primarily in the Western and Byzantine families (D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1505 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt [D* F G are slightly different, but support the participial reading]). But the participle is superior on internal grounds: The structure of v. 17 almost requires an imperative after <span class="greek">ἀλλά</span> (<span class="translit">alla</span>), for this gives balance to the clause: “Do not become foolish, <i>but</i> understand…” If the participle is authentic, it may be imperatival (and thus should be translated just like an imperative), but such is quite rare in the NT. More likely, there is an implied imperative as follows: “Do not become foolish, but <i>become wise</i>, understanding what the will of the Lord is.” Either way, the participle is the harder reading and ought to be considered original. It is significant that seeing an implied imperative in this verse affords a certain symmetry to the author’s thought in vv. 15-21: There are three main sections (vv. 15-16, v. 17, vv. 18-21), each of which provides a negative injunction, followed by a positive injunction, followed by a present adverbial participle. If <span class="greek">συνίετε</span> (<span class="translit">suniete</span>) is original, this symmetry is lost. Thus, even though the external evidence for <span class="greek">συνιέντες</span> (<span class="translit">sunientes</span>) is not nearly as weighty as for the imperative, both the transcriptional and intrinsic evidence support it. </p></p>
<p id="n4900525"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in which.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900526"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dissipation.” See BDAG 148 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀσωτία</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4900527"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Many have taken <span class="greek">ἐν πνεύματι</span> (<span class="translit">en pneumati</span>) as indicating content, i.e., one is to be filled with the Spirit. <i>ExSyn</i> 375 states, “There are no other examples in biblical Greek in which <span class="greek">ἐν</span> + the dative after <span class="greek">πληρόω</span> indicates content. Further, the parallel with <span class="greek">οἴνῳ</span> as well as the common grammatical category of <i>means</i> suggest that the idea intended is that believers are to be filled <i>by means of</i> the [Holy] Spirit. If so there seems to be an unnamed agent. The meaning of this text can only be fully appreciated in light of the <span class="greek">πληρόω</span> language in Ephesians. Always the term is used in connection with a member of the Trinity. Three considerations seem to be key: (1) In Eph 3:19 the ‘hinge’ prayer introducing the last half of the letter makes a request that the believers ‘be filled with all the fullness of God’ (<span class="greek">πληρωθῆτε εἰς πᾶν πλήρωμα τοῦ θεοῦ</span>). The explicit <i>content</i> of <span class="greek">πληρόω</span> is thus God’s fullness (probably a reference to his moral attributes). (2) In 4:10 Christ is said to be the agent of filling (with v. 11 adding the specifics of his giving spiritual gifts). (3) The author then brings his argument to a crescendo in 5:18: Believers are to be filled <i>by</i> Christ <i>by means of</i> the Spirit <i>with</i> the content of the fullness of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900528"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 1096 s.v. <span class="greek">ψάλλω</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4900529"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900530"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for all.” The form “all” can be either neuter or masculine, and an alternative view is “for all” referring to people. The context could suggest believers (“one another” in v. 19). In other places this Greek phrase occurs in the NT, it refers to people (1 Tim 2:6; 2 Cor 5:14-15).</p></p>
<p id="n4900531"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900531">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Eph 5:19-21</i>. In Eph 5:18 the author gives the command to be filled by means of the Holy Spirit. In 5:19-21 there follows five participles: (1) speaking; (2) singing; (3) making music; (4) giving thanks; (5) submitting. These participles have been variously interpreted, but perhaps the two most likely interpretations are (1) the participles indicate the <i>means</i> by which one is filled by the Spirit; (2) the participles indicate the <i>result</i> of being filled by the Spirit. The fact that the participles are present tense and follow the command (i.e., “be filled”) would tend to support both of these options. But it seems out of Paul’s character to reduce the filling of the Spirit to a formula of some kind. To the extent that this is true, it is unlikely then that the author is here stating the <i>means</i> for being filled by the Spirit. Because it is in keeping with Pauline theology and has good grammatical support, it is better to take the participles as indicating certain results of being filled by the Spirit. See <i>ExSyn</i> 639.</p></p>
<p id="n4900532"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Many scholars regard Eph 5:21 as the verse which introduces this section, rather than 5:22. This is due in part to the lack of a main verb in this verse (see <b>tc</b> note which follows). This connection is not likely, however, because it requires the participle <span class="greek">ὑποτασσόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">hupotassomenoi</span>, “submitting”) in 5:21 to act as the main verb of the section, and this participle more likely is linked to the command “be filled by the Spirit” in 5:18 as a participle of result (see <b>sn</b> above). In any case, 5:21 does form a strong link between 5:18-21 and what follows, so the paragraph division which has been placed between 5:21 and 22 should not be viewed as a complete break in the author’s thought.</p></p>
<p id="n4900533"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900533">33</a> <p><b>tc</b> The witnesses for the shorter reading (in which the verb “submit” is only implied) are minimal (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B Cl Hier<sup>mss</sup>), but significant and early. The rest of the witnesses add one of two verb forms as required by the sense of the passage (picking up the verb from v. 21). Several of these witnesses have <span class="greek">ὑποτασσέσθωσαν</span> (<span class="translit">hupotassesthōsan</span>), the third person imperative (so <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A I P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 33 81 1175 1505 1739 1881 2464 <i>al</i> lat co), while other witnesses, especially the later Byzantine cursives, read <span class="greek">ὑποτάσσεσθε</span> (<span class="translit">hupotassesthe</span>), the second person imperative (D F G <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy). The text virtually begs for one of these two verb forms, but the often cryptic style of Paul’s letters argues for the shorter reading. The chronology of development seems to have been <i>no verb</i>—third person imperative—second person imperative. It is not insignificant that early lectionaries began a new day’s reading with v. 22; these may have caused copyists to add the verb at this juncture. </p></p>
<p id="n4900534"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900534">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek article has been translated as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n4900535"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> The direct object “her” is implied, but not found in the Greek text. It has been supplied in the English translation to clarify the sense of the passage. </p></p>
<p id="n4900536"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900536">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The use of the pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτός</span> (<span class="translit">autos</span>) is intensive and focuses attention on Christ as the <i>one</i> who has made the church glorious.</p></p>
<p id="n4900537"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but in order that it may be holy and blameless.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900538"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So also.” </p></p>
<p id="n4900539"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900539">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900540"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900540">40</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most Western witnesses, as well as the majority of Byzantine <span class="smcaps">mss</span> and a few others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0278 0285<sup>vid</sup> 1175 1505 1739<sup>mg</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), add the following words to the end of the verse: <span class="greek">ἐκ τῆς σαρκὸς αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐκ τῶν ὀστέων αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">ek tēs sarkos autou kai ek tōn osteōn autou</span>, “of his flesh and of his bones”). This is a (slightly modified) quotation from Gen 2:23a (LXX). The Alexandrian text is solidly behind the shorter reading (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B 048 33 81 1739* 1881 co). Although it is possible that an early scribe’s eye skipped over the final <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span>, there is a much greater likelihood that a scribe added the Genesis quotation in order to fill out and make explicit the author’s incomplete reference to Gen 2:23. Further, on intrinsic grounds, it seems unlikely that the author would refer to the physical nature of creation when speaking of the “body of Christ” which is spiritual or mystical. Hence, as is often the case with OT quotations, the scribal clarification missed the point the author was making; the shorter reading stands as autographic.</p></p>
<p id="n4900541"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900541">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the two shall be as one flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4900542"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900542">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 2:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4900543"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term “actually” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied in the English translation to bring out the heightened sense of the statement. </p></p>
<p id="n4900544"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900544">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation of <span class="greek">πλήν</span> (<span class="translit">plēn</span>) is somewhat difficult in this context, though the overall thrust of the argument is clear. It could be an adversative idea such as “but,” “nevertheless,” or “however” (see NIV, NASB, NRSV), or it could simply be intended to round out and bring to conclusion the author’s discussion. In this latter case it could be translated with the use of “now” (so A. T. Lincoln, <i>Ephesians</i> [WBC]<i>,</i> 384). </p></p>
<p id="n4900545"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900545">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Nevertheless, you also, one by one, each his own wife so let him love as himself.” This statement is cumbersome and was cleaned up to reflect better English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4900546"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900546">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> The <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) clause was taken as imperatival, i.e., “<i>let</i> the wife <i>respect</i>….”</p></p>
<p id="n4900547"><a href="file1151.xhtml#n4900547">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek verb <span class="greek">φοβέομαι</span> (<span class="translit">phobeomai</span>) here has been translated “respect” and the noun form of the word, i.e., <span class="greek">φόβος</span> (<span class="translit">phobos</span>), has been translated as “reverence” in 5:21. </p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
