<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 James 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>James<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Prejudice and the Law of Love</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> My brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n590021" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n590021">1</a></sup> do not show prejudice<sup><a id="n590022" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n590022">2</a></sup> if you possess faith<sup><a id="n590023" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n590023">3</a></sup> in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ.<sup><a id="n590024" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n590024">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:2</span> For if someone<sup><a id="n590025" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n590025">5</a></sup> comes into your assembly<sup><a id="n590026" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n590026">6</a></sup> wearing a gold ring and fine clothing, and a poor person enters in filthy clothes, <span class="verse">2:3</span> do you pay attention to the one who is finely dressed and say,<sup><a id="n590027" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n590027">7</a></sup> “You sit here in a good place,”<sup><a id="n590028" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n590028">8</a></sup> and to the poor person, “You stand over there,” or “Sit on the floor”?<sup><a id="n590029" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n590029">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:4</span> If so, have you not made distinctions<sup><a id="n5900210" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900210">10</a></sup> among yourselves and become judges with evil motives?<sup><a id="n5900211" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900211">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:5</span> Listen, my dear brothers and sisters!<sup><a id="n5900212" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900212">12</a></sup> Did not God choose the poor in the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom that he promised to those who love him? <span class="verse">2:6</span> But you have dishonored the poor!<sup><a id="n5900213" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900213">13</a></sup> Are not the rich oppressing you and dragging you into the courts? <span class="verse">2:7</span> Do they not blaspheme the good name of the one you belong to?<sup><a id="n5900214" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900214">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:8</span> But if you fulfill the royal law as expressed in this scripture,<sup><a id="n5900215" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900215">15</a></sup> “<b><i>You shall love your neighbor as yourself</i></b>,”<sup><a id="n5900216" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900216">16</a></sup> you are doing well. <span class="verse">2:9</span> But if you show prejudice, you are committing sin and are convicted by the law as violators.<sup><a id="n5900217" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900217">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:10</span> For the one who obeys the whole law but fails<sup><a id="n5900218" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900218">18</a></sup> in one point has become guilty of all of it.<sup><a id="n5900219" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900219">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:11</span> For he who said, “<b><i>Do not commit adultery</i></b>,”<sup><a id="n5900220" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900220">20</a></sup> also said, “<b><i>Do not murder</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n5900221" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900221">21</a></sup> Now if you do not commit adultery but do commit murder, you have become a violator of the law. <span class="verse">2:12</span> Speak and act as those who will be judged by a law that gives freedom.<sup><a id="n5900222" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900222">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:13</span> For judgment is merciless for the one who has shown no mercy. But mercy triumphs over<sup><a id="n5900223" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900223">23</a></sup> judgment. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Faith and Works Together</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:14</span> What good is it, my brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5900224" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900224">24</a></sup> if someone claims to have faith but does not have works? Can this kind of faith<sup><a id="n5900225" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900225">25</a></sup> save him?<sup><a id="n5900226" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900226">26</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:15</span> If a brother or sister<sup><a id="n5900227" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900227">27</a></sup> is poorly clothed and lacks daily food, <span class="verse">2:16</span> and one of you says to them, “Go in peace, keep warm and eat well,” but you do not give them what the body needs,<sup><a id="n5900228" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900228">28</a></sup> what good is it? <span class="verse">2:17</span> So also faith, if it does not have works, is dead being by itself. <span class="verse">2:18</span> But someone will say, “You have faith and I have works.”<sup><a id="n5900229" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900229">29</a></sup> Show me your faith without works and I will show you faith by<sup><a id="n5900230" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900230">30</a></sup> my works. <span class="verse">2:19</span> You believe that God is one; well and good.<sup><a id="n5900231" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900231">31</a></sup> Even the demons believe that—and tremble with fear.<sup><a id="n5900232" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900232">32</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:20</span> But would you like evidence,<sup><a id="n5900233" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900233">33</a></sup> you empty fellow,<sup><a id="n5900234" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900234">34</a></sup> that faith without works is useless?<sup><a id="n5900235" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900235">35</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:21</span> Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he offered Isaac his son on the altar? <span class="verse">2:22</span> You see that his faith was working together with his works and his faith was perfected by works. <span class="verse">2:23</span> And the scripture was fulfilled that says, “<b><i>Now Abraham believed God and it was counted to him for righteousness</i></b>,”<sup><a id="n5900236" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900236">36</a></sup> and <i>he was called God’s friend</i>.<sup><a id="n5900237" href="file1207_notes.xhtml#n5900237">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:24</span> You see that a person is justified by works and not by faith alone. <span class="verse">2:25</span> And similarly, was not Rahab the prostitute also justified by works when she welcomed the messengers and sent them out by another way? <span class="verse">2:26</span> For just as the body without the spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead. </p>

</body>
</html>