<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 8</h2>
<p id="n44007166"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007166">166</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb, which also occurs in Acts 5:33, means “cut to the quick” or “deeply infuriated” (BDAG 235 s.v. <span class="greek">διαπρίω</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n44007167"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007167">167</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “they gnashed their teeth.” This idiom is a picture of violent rage (BDAG 184 s.v. <span class="greek">βρύχω</span>). See also Ps 35:16.</p></p>
<p id="n44007168"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007168">168</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Stephen) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44007169"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007169">169</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “being full,” but the participle <span class="greek">ὑπάρχων</span> (<span class="translit">huparchōn</span>) has not been translated since it would be redundant in English.</p></p>
<p id="n44007170"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007170">170</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “looking intently toward heaven, saw.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀτενίσας</span> (<span class="translit">atenisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44007171"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007171">171</a> <p><b>sn</b> The picture of Jesus <i>standing</i> (rather than seated) probably indicates his rising to receive his child. By announcing his vision, Stephen thoroughly offended his audience, who believed no one could share God’s place in heaven. The phrase is a variation on Ps 110:1.</p></p>
<p id="n44007172"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007172">172</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he said, ‘Look!’” Because of the length of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here; a new sentence is begun instead.</p></p>
<p id="n44007173"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007173">173</a> <p><b>sn</b> They <i>covered their ears</i> to avoid hearing what they considered to be blasphemy.</p></p>
<p id="n44007174"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007174">174</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here; a new sentence is begun instead.</p></p>
<p id="n44007175"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007175">175</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They began to stone him</i>. The irony of the scene is that the people do exactly what the speech complains about in v. 52.</p></p>
<p id="n44007176"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007176">176</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “outer garments.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Laid their cloaks</i>. The outer garment, or cloak, was taken off and laid aside to leave the arms free (in this case for throwing stones).</p></p>
<p id="n44007177"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007177">177</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here; a new sentence is begun instead.</p></p>
<p id="n44007178"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007178">178</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then falling to his knees he cried out.” The participle <span class="greek">θείς</span> (<span class="translit">theis</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44007179"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007179">179</a> <p><b>sn</b> The remarks <i>Lord Jesus, receive my spirit</i> and <i>Lord, do not hold this sin against them</i> recall statements Jesus made on the cross (Luke 23:34, 46).</p></p>
<p id="n44007180"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007180">180</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence and the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here; a new sentence is begun instead.</p></p>
<p id="n44007181"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44007181">181</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">κοιμάω</span> (<span class="translit">koimaō</span>) literally means “sleep,” but it is often used in the Bible as a euphemism for the death of a believer.</p></p>
<p id="n440081"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n440081">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">ἀναίρεσις</span> (<span class="translit">anairesis</span>) can refer to murder (BDAG 64 s.v.; 2 Macc 5:13; Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 5.2.12 [5.165]).</p></p>
<p id="n440082"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n440082">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “severe.”</p></p>
<p id="n440083"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n440083">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now there happened on that day a great persecution.” It is less awkward to say in English “Now on that day a great persecution began.”</p></p>
<p id="n440085"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n440085">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>All</i>. Given that the Jerusalem church is still active after this and that the Hellenists are the focus of Acts 6-8, it is possible to argue that only the Hellenistic Christians were forced to scatter.</p></p>
<p id="n440086"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n440086">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “countryside.”</p></p>
<p id="n440087"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n440087">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Some” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n440088"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n440088">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Made loud lamentation</i>. For someone who was stoned to death, <i>lamentation</i> was normally not allowed (<i>m. Sanhedrin</i> 6:6). The remark points to an unjust death.</p></p>
<p id="n440089"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n440089">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “mourned greatly for him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400810"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400810">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “began to harm [the church] severely.” If the nuance of this verb is “destroy,” then the imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐλυμαίνετο</span> (<span class="translit">elumaineto</span>) is best translated as a conative imperfect as in the translation above. If instead the verb is taken to mean “injure severely” (as L&amp;N 20.24), it should be translated in context as an ingressive imperfect (“began to harm the church severely”). Either option does not significantly alter the overall meaning, since it is clear from the stated actions of Saul in the second half of the verse that he intended to destroy or ravage the church.</p></p>
<p id="n4400811"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400811">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">σύρων</span> (<span class="translit">surōn</span>) has been translated as an finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400812"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400812">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 762 s.v. <span class="greek">παραδίδωμι</span> 1.b has “<span class="greek">εἰς φυλακήν</span> <i>put in prison</i> Ac 8:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400813"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400813">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “main” is supplied in the translation to clarify that “Samaria” is not the name of the city (at least in NT times). See both BDAG 912 s.v. <span class="greek">Σαμάρεια</span>, and L&amp;N 93.568.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The main city of Samaria</i> most likely refers to the principal city of Samaria, rebuilt by Herod the Great as Sebaste in honor of Augustus (J. Boehmer, “Studien zur Geographie Palästinas bes. im Neuen Testament,” <i>ZNW</i> 9 [1908]: 216-18; D. Gill and C. Gempf, eds., <i>The Book of Acts in its Graeco-Roman Setting</i>, 272). This is the best option if the article before “city” is taken as original. If the reading without the article is taken as autographic, then another city may be in view: Gitta, the hometown of Simon Magus according to Justin Martyr (cf. C. K. Barrett, <i>Acts</i> [ICC], 1:402-3; F. F. Bruce, <i>Acts</i> [NICNT], 165).</p></p>
<p id="n4400814"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400814">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect <span class="greek">ἐκήρυσσεν</span> (<span class="translit">ekērussen</span>) has been translated as an ingressive, since this is probably the first time such preaching took place.</p></p>
<p id="n4400815"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:31.</p></p>
<p id="n4400816"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400816">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to what was being said by Philip,” a passive construction that has been changed to active voice in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400817"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400817">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the following context indicates the miraculous nature of the signs mentioned. This term appears 13 times in Acts, but only twice more after Acts 8:13 (i.e., 14:3; 15:12).</p></p>
<p id="n4400818"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400818">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>unclean spirits</i> refers to evil supernatural <i>spirits</i> which were ceremonially <i>unclean</i>, and which caused the persons possessed by them to be ceremonially unclean.</p></p>
<p id="n4400819"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400819">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For [in the case of] many who had unclean spirits, they were coming out, crying in a loud voice.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400820"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400820">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and there came about,” but this is somewhat awkward in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4400821"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400821">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Great joy</i>. The reason for eschatological <i>joy</i> was that such events pointed to God’s decisive deliverance (Luke 7:22-23). Note how the acts of healing extend beyond the Twelve here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400822"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400822">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the idiom <span class="greek">προϋπῆρχεν μαγεύων</span> (<span class="translit">proupērchen mageuōn</span>) meaning “had been practicing magic” see BDAG 889 s.v. <span class="greek">προϋπάρχω</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4400823"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400823">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all of them”; the referent (the people) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400824"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400824">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “This man is what is called the Great Power of God.” The translation “<i>what is called the Great Power of God</i>” is given by BDAG 263 s.v. <span class="greek">δύναμις</span> 5, but the repetition of the article before <span class="greek">καλουμένη μεγάλη</span> (<span class="translit">kaloumenē megalē</span>) suggests the translation “the power of God that is called ‘Great.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4400825"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400825">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The kingdom of God</i> is also what Jesus preached; see Acts 1:3. The term reappears in Acts 14:22; 19:8; 28:23, 31. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See also Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n4400826"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400826">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400827"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400827">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐβαπτίζοντο</span> (<span class="translit">ebaptizonto</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4400828"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400828">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “he kept close company with.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400829"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400829">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He was amazed</i>. Now Simon, the one who amazed others, is himself <i>amazed</i>, showing the superiority of Philip’s connection to God. Christ is better than anything the culture has to offer.</p></p>
<p id="n4400831"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400831">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “message.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400832"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400832">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They sent</i>. The Jerusalem church with the apostles was overseeing the expansion of the church, as the distribution of the Spirit indicates in vv. 15-17.</p></p>
<p id="n4400833"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400833">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” The relative pronoun was replaced by the phrase “these two” and a new sentence was begun in the translation at this point to improve the English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400834"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400834">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For he”; the referent (the Spirit) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400835"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400835">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “fallen on.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400836"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400836">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4400837"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400837">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on them”; the referent (the Samaritans) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400838"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400838">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They received the Holy Spirit</i>. It is likely this special distribution of the Spirit took place because a key ethnic boundary was being crossed. Here are some of “those far off” of Acts 2:38-40.</p></p>
<p id="n4400839"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400839">39</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45,74</sup> A* C D E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy bo) here read “the Holy Spirit” (<span class="greek">τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον</span>, <span class="translit">to pneuma to hagion</span>), while a few key <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have simply <span class="greek">τὸ πνεῦμα</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A<sup>c</sup> B sa mae). Although it is possible that some scribes omitted <span class="greek">τὸ ἅγιον</span> because of its perceived superfluity (note vv. 15, 17, 19), it is far more likely that others added the adjective out of pious motives. </p></p>
<p id="n4400840"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400840">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “ability”; <i>Grk</i> “authority.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400841"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400841">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “May your silver together with you be sent into destruction.” This is a strong curse. The gifts of God are sovereignly bestowed and cannot be purchased.</p></p>
<p id="n4400842"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400842">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “obtain.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400843"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400843">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “share or part” is given by L&amp;N 63.13.</p></p>
<p id="n4400844"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400844">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Since the semantic range for <span class="greek">λόγος</span> (<span class="translit">logos</span>) is so broad, a number of different translations could be given for the prepositional phrase here. Something along the lines of “in this thing” would work well, but is too colloquial for the present translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400845"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400845">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and implore the Lord.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400846"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400846">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that if possible the intent of your heart may be forgiven you.” The passive construction is somewhat awkward in contemporary English and has thus been converted to an active construction in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400847"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400847">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the gall of bitterness,” an idiom meaning to be particularly envious or resentful of someone. In this case Simon was jealous of the apostles’ power to bestow the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands, and wanted that power for himself. The literal phrase does not convey this to the modern reader, and in fact some modern translations have simply rendered the phrase as involving bitterness, which misses the point of the envy on Simon’s part. See L&amp;N 88.166. The OT images come from Deut 29:17-18 and Isa 58:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4400848"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400848">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Simon answered and said.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Given that <i>Simon</i> does not follow Peter’s call for repentance, many interpreters read this reply as flippant rather than sincere. But the exact nature of Simon’s reply is not entirely clear.</p></p>
<p id="n4400849"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400849">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “may come upon.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400850"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400850">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “after they”; the referents (Peter and John) have been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400851"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400851">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">διαμαρτύρομαι</span> (<span class="translit">diamarturomai</span>) can mean “warn,” and could be taken to refer specifically to the warning given to Simon in the preceding verses. However, a more general reference is more likely, referring to parting exhortations from Peter and John to the entire group of believers.</p></p>
<p id="n4400852"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400852">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The word of the Lord</i> is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; Luke 22:61, Acts 11:16, 1 Pet 1:25) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; here and in Acts 13:44, 48, 49; 15:35, 36; 16:32; 19:10, 20; 1 Thess 1:8; 4:15; 2 Thess 3:1). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said.</p></p>
<p id="n4400853"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400853">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they were returning to Jerusalem and were proclaiming.” The first imperfect is taken ingressively and the second is viewed iteratively (“proclaiming…as they went”). </p></p>
<p id="n4400854"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400854">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> By <i>proclaiming the good news to many Samaritan villages</i>, the apostles now actively share in the broader ministry the Hellenists had started.</p></p>
<p id="n4400855"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400855">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> “As they went” is not in the Greek text, but is implied by the imperfect tense (see <b>tn</b> above). </p></p>
<p id="n4400856"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400856">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the angel of the Lord.” See the note on the word “Lord” in 5:19. </p></p>
<p id="n4400857"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400857">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Lord spoke to Philip, saying.” The redundant participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4400858"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400858">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Get up and go about noon.” The phrase <span class="greek">κατὰ μεσημβρίαν</span> (<span class="translit">kata mesēmbrian</span>) can be translated either “about noon” (L&amp;N 67.74) or “toward the south” (L&amp;N 82.4). Since the angel’s command appears to call for immediate action (“Get up”) and would not therefore need a time indicator, a directional reference (“toward the south”) is more likely here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400860"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400860">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “wilderness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400861"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400861">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “This is a desert road” are probably best understood as a comment by the author of Acts, but it is possible they form part of the angel’s speech to Philip, in which case the verse would read: “Get up and go south on the road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza—the desert road.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The concluding note about the road appears to be a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4400862"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400862">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) carries something of a resultative force in this context because what follows describes Philip’s response to the angel’s command.</p></p>
<p id="n4400863"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400863">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So getting up he went.” The aorist participle <span class="greek">ἀναστάς</span> (<span class="translit">anastas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400864"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400864">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And there.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400865"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400865">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and behold.” This expression is used to portray Philip’s encounter with the Ethiopian in a vivid way. In the English translation this vividness is difficult to convey; it is necessary to supply the words “he met.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400866"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400866">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>eunuch</i> normally referred to a man who had been castrated, but this was not always the case (see Gen 39:1 LXX, where Potiphar is called a eunuch). Such castrated individuals were preferred as court officials in the East, although Judaism opposed the practice. The Mosaic law excluded eunuchs from Israel (Deut 23:1), although God certainly accepted them (Isa 56:3-5; Wis 3:14). This individual was a high official, since he was said to be <i>in charge of all her treasury</i>. He may or may not have been a eunuch physically. He appears to be the first fully Gentile convert to Christianity, since the Samaritans mentioned previously (Acts 8:4-25) were regarded as half-breeds.</p></p>
<p id="n4400867"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400867">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Candace” (the title of the queen of the Ethiopians). The term <span class="greek">Κανδάκης</span> (<span class="translit">Kandakēs</span>) is much more likely a title rather than a proper name (like Pharaoh, which is a title); see L&amp;N 37.77. A few, however, still take the word to be the name of the queen (L&amp;N 93.209). BDAG 507 s.v. <span class="greek">Κανδάκη</span>, treats the term as a title and lists classical usage by Strabo (<i>Geography</i> 17.1.54) and others.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Candace</i> was the title of the queen of the Ethiopians. <i>Ethiopia</i> refers to the kingdom of Nubia in the northern Sudan, whose capital was Meroe (not to be confused with Abyssinia, which was later called Ethiopia and converted to Christianity in the 4th century <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span>). Classical writers refer to several queens of Meroe in the 1st century <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span> and 1st century <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> who had the title Candace (<i>Kandake</i>). The Candace referred to here was probably Amantitere, who ruled <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 25-41.</p></p>
<p id="n4400868"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400868">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who was over all her treasury, who.” The two consecutive relative clauses make for awkward English style, so the second was begun as a new sentence with the pronoun “he” supplied in place of the Greek relative pronoun to make a complete sentence in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4400869"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400869">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> Since this man had <i>come to Jerusalem to worship</i>, he may have been a proselyte to Judaism. This event is a precursor to Acts 10.</p></p>
<p id="n4400870"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400870">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and was sitting.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400871"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400871">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and was reading.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p><p><b>sn</b> The fact that this man was <i>reading</i> from a scroll (an expensive item in the first century) indicates his connection to a wealthy house.</p></p>
<p id="n4400872"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400872">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">προσδραμών</span> (<span class="translit">prosdramōn</span>) is regarded as attendant circumstance.</p></p>
<p id="n4400873"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400873">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to it” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4400874"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400874">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “heard him”; the referent (the man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400875"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400875">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun.</p></p>
<p id="n4400876"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400876">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he said,” but since what follows is a question, it is better English style to translate the introduction to the question “he asked him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400877"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400877">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (the man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400878"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400878">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “How am I able, unless…” The translation is based on the force of the conjunction <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) in this context. The translation “<i>How in the world can I?</i>” is given in BDAG 189 s.v. <span class="greek">γάρ</span> 1.f.</p></p>
<p id="n4400879"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400879">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400880"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400880">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “does.” The present tense here was translated as a past tense to maintain consistency with the first line of the quotation (“he was led like a sheep to slaughter”), which has an aorist passive verb normally translated as a past tense in English. </p></p>
<p id="n4400881"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400881">81</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (C E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33<sup>vid</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy) read “In his humiliation,” adding <span class="greek">αὐτοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">autou</span>, “his”) after <span class="greek">ταπεινώσει</span> (<span class="translit">tapeinōsei</span>, “humiliation”), while the earlier and better witnesses lack the pronoun (so <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B 1739 lat). However, the LXX of Isa 53:8 also lacks the pronoun, supplying motivation for scribes to omit it here. At the same time, scribes would also be motivated to add the pronoun both for clarity’s sake (note the similar impulse that led to the addition of <span class="greek">δέ</span> [<span class="translit">de</span>] by many of the same <span class="smcaps">mss</span> at the beginning of the next line) and to give balance to the lines (the pronoun is indisputably used five other times in vv. 32-33 in quoting Isa 53). On balance, the shorter reading is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4400882"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400882">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “justice was denied him”; <i>Grk</i> “his justice was taken away.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400883"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400883">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “family; or “origin.” The meaning of <span class="greek">γενεά</span> (<span class="translit">genea</span>) in the quotation is uncertain; BDAG 192 s.v. <span class="greek">γενεά</span> 4 suggests “<i>family history</i>.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The rhetorical question suggests the insensitivity of this generation for its act against God’s servant, who was slain unjustly as he was silent.</p></p>
<p id="n4400884"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400884">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is taken away.” The present tense here was translated as a past tense to maintain consistency with the rest of the quotation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400885"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400885">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 53:7-8.</p></p>
<p id="n4400886"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400886">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered and said.” The redundant participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> (<span class="translit">apokritheis</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4400887"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400887">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I beg you,” “I ask you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400888"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400888">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>About himself, or about someone else?</i> It is likely in 1st century Judaism this would have been understood as either Israel or Isaiah.</p></p>
<p id="n4400889"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400889">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “opening his mouth” (a Semitic idiom for beginning to speak in a somewhat formal manner). The participle <span class="greek">ἀνοίξας</span> (<span class="translit">anoixas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400890"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400890">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Beginning with this scripture</i>. The discussion likely included many of the scriptures Acts has already noted for the reader in earlier speeches. At the least, readers of Acts would know what other scriptures might be meant.</p></p>
<p id="n4400891"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400891">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “What prevents me.” The rhetorical question means, “I should get baptized, right?”</p></p>
<p id="n4400892"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400892">92</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (E 36 323 453 945 1739 1891) add, with minimal differences in wording, <b>8:37</b> “He said to him, ‘If you believe with your whole heart, you may.’ He replied, ‘I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.’” Verse 37 is lacking in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45,74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C 33 614 vg sy<sup>p,h</sup> co. It is clearly not a part of the original text of Acts. The variant is significant in showing how some in the early church viewed the necessity of a confession of faith. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n4400893"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400893">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch.” Since this is somewhat redundant in English, it was simplified to “and both Philip and the eunuch went down into the water.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400894"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400894">94</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Philip baptized</i>. Again, someone beyond the Twelve has ministered an ordinance of faith.</p></p>
<p id="n4400895"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400895">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 189 s.v. <span class="greek">γάρ</span> 2 indicates that under certain circumstances <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) has the same meaning as <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4400896"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400896">96</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note that the response to the gospel is <i>rejoicing</i> (joy, cf. Acts 11:23; 13:48).</p></p>
<p id="n4400897"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400897">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “appeared.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400898"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400898">98</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Azotus</i> was a city on the coast of southern Palestine, known as Ashdod in OT times.</p></p>
<p id="n4400899"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n4400899">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the area” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n44008100"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44008100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “he preached the gospel.”</p></p>
<p id="n44008101"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44008101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “cities.”</p></p>
<p id="n44008102"><a href="file1070.xhtml#n44008102">102</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
