<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Philippians 1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Philippians<br />Chapter 1</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Salutation</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:1</span> From Paul<sup><a id="n500011" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n500011">1</a></sup> and Timothy, slaves<sup><a id="n500012" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n500012">2</a></sup> of Christ Jesus, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, with the overseers<sup><a id="n500014" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n500014">4</a></sup> and deacons. <span class="verse">1:2</span> Grace and peace to you<sup><a id="n500015" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n500015">5</a></sup> from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Prayer for the Church</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:3</span> I thank my God every time I remember you.<sup><a id="n500016" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n500016">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:4</span> I always pray with joy in my every prayer for all of you <span class="verse">1:5</span> because of your participation<sup><a id="n500017" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n500017">7</a></sup> in the gospel from the first day until now.<sup><a id="n500018" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n500018">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:6</span> For I am sure of this very thing,<sup><a id="n500019" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n500019">9</a></sup> that the one<sup><a id="n5000110" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000110">10</a></sup> who began a good work in<sup><a id="n5000111" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000111">11</a></sup> you will perfect it<sup><a id="n5000112" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000112">12</a></sup> until the day of Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">1:7</span> For<sup><a id="n5000113" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000113">13</a></sup> it is right for me to think this about all of you, because I have you in my heart,<sup><a id="n5000114" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000114">14</a></sup> since both in my imprisonment<sup><a id="n5000115" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000115">15</a></sup> and in the defense and confirmation of the gospel all of you became partners in God’s grace<sup><a id="n5000116" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000116">16</a></sup> together with me. <span class="verse">1:8</span> For God is my witness that I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">1:9</span> And I pray this, that your love may abound even more and more in knowledge and every kind of insight <span class="verse">1:10</span> so that you can decide what is best, and thus be sincere and blameless for the day of Christ, <span class="verse">1:11</span> filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle"> Ministry as a Prisoner</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:12</span> I want you to know, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5000117" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000117">17</a></sup> that my situation has actually turned out to advance the gospel:<sup><a id="n5000118" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000118">18</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:13</span> The<sup><a id="n5000119" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000119">19</a></sup> whole imperial guard<sup><a id="n5000120" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000120">20</a></sup> and everyone else knows<sup><a id="n5000121" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000121">21</a></sup> that I am in prison<sup><a id="n5000122" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000122">22</a></sup> for the sake of Christ, <span class="verse">1:14</span> and most of the brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n5000123" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000123">23</a></sup> having confidence in the Lord<sup><a id="n5000124" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000124">24</a></sup> because of my imprisonment, now more than ever<sup><a id="n5000125" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000125">25</a></sup> dare to speak the word<sup><a id="n5000126" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000126">26</a></sup> fearlessly. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:15</span> Some, to be sure, are preaching Christ from envy and rivalry, but others from goodwill. <span class="verse">1:16</span> The latter do so from love because they know that I am placed here for the defense of the gospel. <span class="verse">1:17</span> The former proclaim Christ from selfish ambition, not sincerely, because they think they can cause trouble for me in my imprisonment.<sup><a id="n5000127" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000127">27</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:18</span> What is the result? Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is being proclaimed, and in this I rejoice.</p>
<p class="bodytext">Yes,<sup><a id="n5000128" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000128">28</a></sup> and I will continue to rejoice, <span class="verse">1:19</span> for I know that this will turn out for my deliverance<sup><a id="n5000129" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000129">29</a></sup> through your prayers and the help of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. <span class="verse">1:20</span> My confident hope<sup><a id="n5000130" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000130">30</a></sup> is that I will in no way be ashamed<sup><a id="n5000131" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000131">31</a></sup> but that with complete boldness, even now as always, Christ will be exalted in my body, whether I live or die.<sup><a id="n5000132" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000132">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:21</span> For to me, living is Christ and dying is gain. <span class="verse">1:22</span> Now if I am to go on living in the body,<sup><a id="n5000133" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000133">33</a></sup> this will mean productive work<sup><a id="n5000134" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000134">34</a></sup> for me, yet I don’t know which I prefer:<sup><a id="n5000135" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000135">35</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:23</span> I feel torn between the two,<sup><a id="n5000136" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000136">36</a></sup> because I have a desire to depart and be with Christ, which is better by far, <span class="verse">1:24</span> but it is more vital for your sake that I remain<sup><a id="n5000137" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000137">37</a></sup> in the body.<sup><a id="n5000138" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000138">38</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:25</span> And since I am sure of this, I know that I will remain and continue with all of you for the sake of your progress<sup><a id="n5000139" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000139">39</a></sup> and joy in the faith,<sup><a id="n5000140" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000140">40</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:26</span> so that what you can be proud of may increase<sup><a id="n5000141" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000141">41</a></sup> because of me in Christ Jesus, when I come back to you.<sup><a id="n5000142" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000142">42</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">1:27</span> Only conduct yourselves<sup><a id="n5000143" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000143">43</a></sup> in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ so that—whether I come and see you or whether I remain absent—I should hear that<sup><a id="n5000144" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000144">44</a></sup> you are standing firm in one spirit, with one mind, by contending side by side for the faith of the gospel,<sup><a id="n5000145" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000145">45</a></sup> <span class="verse">1:28</span> and by not being intimidated in any way by your opponents. This is<sup><a id="n5000146" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000146">46</a></sup> a sign of their<sup><a id="n5000147" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000147">47</a></sup> destruction, but of your salvation—a sign which<sup><a id="n5000148" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000148">48</a></sup> is from God. <span class="verse">1:29</span> For it has been granted to you<sup><a id="n5000149" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000149">49</a></sup> not only to believe in Christ but also to suffer for him, <span class="verse">1:30</span> since you are encountering<sup><a id="n5000150" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000150">50</a></sup> the same conflict that you saw me face and now hear that I am facing.<sup><a id="n5000151" href="file1154_notes.xhtml#n5000151">51</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>