<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for John 1</h2>
<p id="n430011"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n430011">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>In the beginning</i>. The search for the basic “stuff” out of which things are made was the earliest one in Greek philosophy. It was attended by the related question of “What is the process by which the secondary things came out of the primary one (or ones)?,” or in Aristotelian terminology, “What is the ‘beginning’ (same Greek word as <i>beginning</i>, John 1:1) and what is the origin of the things that are made?” In the New Testament the word usually has a temporal sense, but even BDAG 138 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀρχή</span> 3 lists a major category of meaning as “the first cause.” For John, the words “In the beginning” are most likely a conscious allusion to the opening words of Genesis—“In the beginning.” Other concepts which occur prominently in Gen 1 are also found in John’s prologue: “life” (1:4) “light” (1:4) and “darkness” (1:5). Gen 1 describes the first (physical) creation; John 1 describes the new (spiritual) creation. But this is not to play off a false dichotomy between “physical” and “spiritual”; the first creation was both physical and spiritual. The new creation is really a re-creation, of the spiritual (first) but also the physical. (In spite of the common understanding of John’s “spiritual” emphasis, the “physical” re-creation should not be overlooked; this occurs in John 2 with the changing of water into wine, in John 11 with the resurrection of Lazarus, and the emphasis of John 20-21 on the aftermath of Jesus’ own resurrection.)</p></p>
<p id="n430012"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n430012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The preposition <span class="greek">πρός</span> (<span class="translit">pros</span>) implies not just proximity, but intimate personal relationship. M. Dods stated, “<span class="greek">Πρός</span>…means more than <span class="greek">μετά</span> or <span class="greek">παρά</span>, and is regularly employed in expressing the presence of one person with another” (“The Gospel of St. John,” <i>The Expositor</i>’<i>s Greek Testament</i>, 1:684). See also Mark 6:3, Matt 13:56, Mark 9:19, Gal 1:18, 2 John 12.</p></p>
<p id="n430013"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n430013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and what God was the Word was.” Colwell’s Rule is often invoked to support the translation of <span class="greek">θεός</span> (<span class="translit">theos</span>) as definite (“God”) rather than indefinite (“a god”) here. However, Colwell’s Rule merely <i>permits</i>, but does not demand, that a predicate nominative ahead of an equative verb be translated as definite rather than indefinite. Furthermore, Colwell’s Rule did not deal with a third possibility, that the anarthrous predicate noun may have more of a qualitative nuance when placed ahead of the verb. A definite meaning for the term is reflected in the traditional rendering “the word was God.” From a technical standpoint, though, it is preferable to see a qualitative aspect to anarthrous <span class="greek">θεός</span> in John 1:1c (<i>ExSyn</i> 266-69). Translations like the NEB, REB, and Moffatt are helpful in capturing the sense in John 1:1c, that the Word was fully deity in essence (just as much God as God the Father). However, in contemporary English “the Word was divine” (Moffatt) does not quite catch the meaning since “divine” as a descriptive term is not used in contemporary English exclusively of God. The translation “what God was the Word was” is perhaps the most nuanced rendering, conveying that everything God was in essence, the Word was too. This points to unity of essence between the Father and the Son without equating the persons. However, in surveying a number of native speakers of English, some of whom had formal theological training and some of whom did not, the editors concluded that the fine distinctions indicated by “what God was the Word was” would not be understood by many contemporary readers. Thus the translation “the Word was fully God” was chosen because it is more likely to convey the meaning to the average English reader that the <span class="translit">Logos</span> (which “became flesh and took up residence among us” in John 1:14 and is thereafter identified in the Fourth Gospel as Jesus) is one in essence with God the Father. The previous phrase, “the Word was with God,” shows that the <span class="translit">Logos</span> is distinct in person from God the Father.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>And the Word was fully God</i>. John’s theology consistently drives toward the conclusion that Jesus, the incarnate Word, is just as much God as God the Father. This can be seen, for example, in texts like John 10:30 (“The Father and I are one”), 17:11 (“so that they may be one just as we are one”), and 8:58 (“before Abraham came into existence, I am”). The construction in John 1:1c does not equate the Word with the <i>person</i> of God (this is ruled out by 1:1b, “the Word was with God”); rather it affirms that the Word and God are one in <i>essence</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n430014"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n430014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (the Word) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n430015"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n430015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “made”; <i>Grk</i> “came into existence.”</p></p>
<p id="n430016"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n430016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “made”; <i>Grk</i> “nothing came into existence.”</p></p>
<p id="n430017"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n430017">7</a> <p><b>tc</b> There is a major punctuation problem here: Should this relative clause go with v. 3 or v. 4? The earliest <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have no punctuation (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75*</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B <span class="greek">Δ</span> <i>al</i>). Many of the later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> which do have punctuation place it before the phrase, thus putting it with v. 4 (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75c</sup> C D L W<sup>s</sup> 050* <i>pc</i>). NA<sup>25</sup> placed the phrase in v. 3; NA<sup>26</sup> moved the words to the beginning of v. 4. In a detailed article K. Aland defended the change (“Eine Untersuchung zu Johannes 1, 3-4. Über die Bedeutung eines Punktes,” <i>ZNW</i> 59 [1968]: 174-209). He sought to prove that the attribution of <span class="greek">ὃ γέγονεν</span> (<span class="translit">ho gegonen</span>) to v. 3 began to be carried out in the 4th century in the Greek church. This came out of the Arian controversy, and was intended as a safeguard for doctrine. The change was unknown in the West. Aland is probably correct in affirming that the phrase was attached to v. 4 by the Gnostics and the Eastern Church; only when the Arians began to use the phrase was it attached to v. 3. But this does not rule out the possibility that, by moving the words from v. 4 to v. 3, one is restoring the original reading. Understanding the words as part of v. 3 is natural and adds to the emphasis which is built up there, while it also gives a terse, forceful statement in v. 4. On the other hand, taking the phrase <span class="greek">ὃ γέγονεν</span> with v. 4 gives a complicated expression: C. K. Barrett says that both ways of understanding v. 4 with <span class="greek">ὃ γέγονεν</span> included “are almost impossibly clumsy” (<i>St. John</i>, 157): “That which came into being—in it the Word was life”; “That which came into being—in the Word was its life.” The following stylistic points should be noted in the solution of this problem: (1) John frequently starts sentences with <span class="greek">ἐν</span> (<span class="translit">en</span>); (2) he repeats frequently (“nothing was created that has been created”); (3) 5:26 and 6:53 both give a sense similar to v. 4 if it is understood without the phrase; (4) it makes far better Johannine sense to say that in the Word was life than to say that the created universe (what was made, <span class="greek">ὃ γέγονεν</span>) was life in him. In conclusion, the phrase is best taken with v. 3. Schnackenburg, Barrett, Carson, Haenchen, Morris, KJV, and NIV concur (against Brown, Beasley-Murray, and NEB). The arguments of R. Schnackenburg, <i>St. John</i>, 1:239-40, are particularly persuasive.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “made”; <i>Grk</i> “that has come into existence.” </p></p>
<p id="n430018"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n430018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> John uses <span class="greek">ζωή</span> (<span class="translit">zōē</span>) 36 times: 17 times it occurs with <span class="greek">αἰώνιος</span> (<span class="translit">aiōnios</span>), and in the remaining occurrences outside the prologue it is clear from context that “eternal” life is meant. The two uses in 1:4, if they do not refer to “eternal” life, would be the only exceptions. (Also 1 John uses <span class="greek">ζωή</span> 13 times, always of “eternal” life.)</p><p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 36:9, which gives significant OT background: “For with you is the fountain of life; In your light we see light.” In later Judaism, Bar 4:2 expresses a similar idea. Life, especially eternal life, will become one of the major themes of John’s Gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n430019"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n430019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “humanity”; <i>Grk</i> “of men” (but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> [<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>] is used in a generic sense here, not restricted to males only, thus “mankind,” “humanity”).</p></p>
<p id="n4300110"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> To this point the author has used past tenses (imperfects, aorists); now he switches to a present. The light continually shines (thus the translation, “shines on”). Even as the author writes, it is shining. The present here most likely has gnomic force (though it is possible to take it as a historical present); it expresses the timeless truth that the light of the world (cf. 8:12; 9:5; 12:46) never ceases to shine.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The light shines on</i>. The question of whether John has in mind here the preincarnate Christ or the incarnate Christ is probably too specific. The incarnation is not really introduced until v. 9, but here the point is more general: It is of the very nature of <i>light</i>, that it <i>shines</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4300111"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300111">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> The author now introduces what will become a major theme of John’s Gospel: the opposition of <i>light</i> and <i>darkness</i>. The antithesis is a natural one, widespread in antiquity. Gen 1 gives considerable emphasis to it in the account of the creation, and so do the writings of Qumran. It is the major theme of one of the most important extra-biblical documents found at Qumran, the so-called War Scroll, properly titled <i>The War of the Sons of Light with the Sons of Darkness</i>. Connections between John and Qumran are still an area of scholarly debate and a consensus has not yet emerged. See T. A. Hoffman, “1 John and the Qumran Scrolls,” <i>BTB</i> 8 (1978): 117-25.</p></p>
<p id="n4300112"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and,” but the context clearly indicates a contrast, so this has been translated as an adversative use of <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4300113"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “comprehended it,” or “overcome it.” The verb <span class="greek">κατέλαβεν</span> (<span class="translit">katelaben</span>) is not easy to translate. “To seize” or “to grasp” is possible, but this also permits “to grasp with the mind” in the sense of “to comprehend” (esp. in the middle voice). This is probably another Johannine double meaning—one does not usually think of darkness as trying to “understand” light. For it to mean this, “darkness” must be understood as meaning “certain people,” or perhaps “humanity” at large, darkened in understanding. But in John’s usage, darkness is not normally used of people or a group of people. Rather it usually signifies the evil environment or ‘sphere’ in which people find themselves: “They loved darkness rather than light” (John 3:19). Those who follow Jesus do not walk in darkness (8:12). They are to walk while they have light, lest the darkness “overtake/overcome” them (12:35, same verb as here). For John, with his set of symbols and imagery, darkness is not something which seeks to “understand (comprehend)” the light, but represents the forces of evil which seek to “overcome (conquer)” it. The English verb “to master” may be used in both sorts of contexts, as “he mastered his lesson” and “he mastered his opponent.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300114"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300114">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John</i> refers to John the Baptist.</p></p>
<p id="n4300115"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “came for a testimony.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Witness</i> is also one of the major themes of John’s Gospel. The Greek verb <span class="greek">μαρτυρέω</span> (<span class="translit">martureō</span>) occurs 33 times (compare to once in Matthew, once in Luke, 0 in Mark) and the noun <span class="greek">μαρτυρία</span> (<span class="translit">marturia</span>) 14 times (0 in Matthew, once in Luke, 3 times in Mark).</p></p>
<p id="n4300116"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to bear witness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300117"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300118"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to bear witness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300119"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “every man” (but in a generic sense, “every person,” or “every human being”).</p></p>
<p id="n4300120"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “He was the true light, who gives light to everyone who comes into the world.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐρχόμενον</span> (<span class="translit">erchomenon</span>) may be either (1) neuter nominative, agreeing with <span class="greek">τὸ φῶς</span> (<span class="translit">to phōs</span>), or (2) masculine accusative, agreeing with <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπον</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpon</span>). Option (1) results in a periphrastic imperfect with <span class="greek">ἦν</span> (<span class="translit">ēn</span>), <span class="greek">ἦν τὸ φῶς…ἐρχόμενον</span>, referring to the incarnation. Option (2) would have the participle modifying <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπον</span> and referring to the true light as enlightening “every man who comes into the world.” Option (2) has some rabbinic parallels: The phrase “all who come into the world” is a fairly common expression for “every man” (cf. <i>Leviticus Rabbah</i> 31.6). But (1) must be preferred here, because: (a) In the next verse the light is in the world; it is logical for v. 9 to speak of its entering the world; (b) in other passages Jesus is described as “coming into the world” (6:14; 9:39; 11:27; 16:28) and in 12:46 Jesus says: <span class="greek">ἐγὼ φῶς εἰς τὸν κόσμον ἐλήλυθα</span> (<span class="translit">egō phōs eis ton kosmon elēlutha</span>); (c) use of a periphrastic participle with the imperfect tense is typical Johannine style: 1:28; 2:6; 3:23; 10:40; 11:1; 13:23; 18:18 and 25. In every one of these except 13:23 the finite verb is first and separated by one or more intervening words from the participle.</p><p><b>sn</b> In v. 9 the <i>world</i> (<span class="greek">κόσμος</span>, <span class="translit">kosmos</span>) is mentioned for the first time. This is another important theme word for John. Generally, <i>the world</i> as a Johannine concept does not refer to the totality of creation (the universe), although there are exceptions at 11:9. 17:5, 24; 21:25, but to the world of human beings and human affairs. Even in 1:10 the world created through the <i>Logos</i> is a world capable of knowing (or reprehensibly not knowing) its Creator. Sometimes <i>the world</i> is further qualified as <i>this world</i> (<span class="greek">ὁ κόσμος οὗτος</span>, <span class="translit">ho kosmos houtos</span>) as in 8:23; 9:39; 11:9; 12:25, 31; 13:1; 16:11; 18:36. This is not merely equivalent to the rabbinic phrase “this present age” (<span class="greek">ὁ αἰών οὗτος</span>, <span class="translit">ho aiōn houtos</span>) and contrasted with “the world to come.” For John it is also contrasted to a world other than this one, already existing; this is the lower world, corresponding to which there is a world above (see especially 8:23; 18:36). Jesus appears not only as the Messiah by means of whom an eschatological future is anticipated (as in the synoptic gospels) but also as an envoy from the heavenly world to <i>this world</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4300121"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was made”; <i>Grk</i> “came into existence.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300122"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and,” but in context this is an adversative use of <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) and is thus translated “but.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300123"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “know.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300124"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to his own things.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300125"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and,” but in context this is an adversative use of <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) and is thus translated “but.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300126"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> “People” is not in the Greek text but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4300127"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300127">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>His own people did not receive him</i>. There is a subtle irony here: When the <span class="greek">λόγος</span> (<span class="translit">logos</span>) came into the world, he came to his <i>own</i> (<span class="greek">τὰ ἴδια</span>, <span class="translit">ta idia</span>, literally “his own things”) and his own people (<span class="greek">οἱ ἴδιοι</span>, <span class="translit">hoi idioi</span>), who should have known and received him, but they did not. This time John does not say that “his own” did not know him, but that they <i>did not receive him</i> (<span class="greek">παρέλαβον</span>, <span class="translit">parelabon</span>). The idea is one not of mere recognition, but of acceptance and welcome.</p></p>
<p id="n4300128"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the use of the <span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> + <span class="greek">εἰς</span> (<span class="translit">pisteuō</span> + <span class="translit">eis</span>) construction in John: The verb <span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> occurs 98 times in John (compared to 11 times in Matthew, 14 times in Mark [including the longer ending], and 9 times in Luke). One of the unsolved mysteries is why the corresponding noun form <span class="greek">πίστις</span> (<span class="translit">pistis</span>) is never used at all. Many have held the noun was in use in some pre-Gnostic sects and this rendered it suspect for John. It might also be that for John, faith was an activity, something that men do (cf. W. Turner, “Believing and Everlasting Life—A Johannine Inquiry,” <i>ExpTim</i> 64 [1952/53]: 50-52). John uses <span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> in 4 major ways: (1) of believing facts, reports, etc., 12 times; (2) of believing people (or the scriptures), 19 times; (3) of believing “in” Christ” (<span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> + <span class="greek">εἰς</span> + acc.), 36 times; (4) used absolutely without any person or object specified, 30 times (the one remaining passage is 2:24, where Jesus refused to “trust” himself to certain individuals). Of these, the most significant is the use of <span class="greek">πιστεύω</span> with <span class="greek">εἰς</span> + accusative. It is not unlike the Pauline <span class="greek">ἐν Χριστῷ</span> (<span class="translit">en Christō</span>) formula. Some have argued that this points to a Hebrew (more likely Aramaic) original behind the Fourth Gospel. But it probably indicates something else, as C. H. Dodd observed: “<span class="greek">πιστεύειν</span> with the dative so inevitably connoted simple credence, in the sense of an intellectual judgment, that the moral element of personal trust or reliance inherent in the Hebrew or Aramaic phrase—an element integral to the primitive Christian conception of faith in Christ—needed to be otherwise expressed” (<i>The Interpretation of the Fourth Gospel</i>, 183).</p></p>
<p id="n4300129"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term translated “born” here also involves conception.</p></p>
<p id="n4300130"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of blood(s).” The plural <span class="greek">αἱμάτων</span> (<span class="translit">haimatōn</span>) has seemed a problem to many interpreters. At least some sources in antiquity imply that blood was thought of as being important in the development of the fetus during its time in the womb: thus Wis 7:1: “in the womb of a mother I was molded into flesh, within the period of 10 months, compacted with blood, from the seed of a man and the pleasure of marriage.” In John 1:13, the plural <span class="greek">αἱμάτων</span> may imply the action of both parents. It may also refer to the “genetic” contribution of both parents, and so be equivalent to “human descent” (see BDAG 26 s.v. <span class="greek">αἷμα</span> 1.a). E. C. Hoskyns thinks John could not have used the singular here because Christians are in fact ‘begotten’ by the blood of Christ (<i>The Fourth Gospel</i>, 143), although the context would seem to make it clear that the blood in question is something other than the blood of Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n4300131"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of the will of the flesh.” The phrase <span class="greek">οὐδὲ ἐκ θελήματος σαρκός</span> (<span class="translit">oude ek thelēmatos sarkos</span>) is more clearly a reference to sexual desire, but it should be noted that <span class="greek">σάρξ</span> (<span class="translit">sarx</span>) in John does not convey the evil sense common in Pauline usage. For John it refers to the physical nature in its weakness rather than in its sinfulness. There is no clearer confirmation of this than the immediately following verse, where the <span class="greek">λόγος</span> (<span class="translit">logos</span>) became <span class="greek">σάρξ</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4300132"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “man’s.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300133"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The third phrase, <span class="greek">οὐδὲ ἐκ θελήματος ἀνδρός</span> (<span class="translit">oude ek thelēmatos andros</span>), means much the same as the second one. The word here (<span class="greek">ἀνηρ</span>, <span class="translit">anēr</span>) is often used for a husband, resulting in the translation “or a husband’s decision,” or more generally, “or of any human volition whatsoever.” L. Morris may be right when he sees here an emphasis directed at the Jewish pride in race and patriarchal ancestry, although such a specific reference is difficult to prove (<i>John</i> [NICNT]<i>,</i> 101).</p></p>
<p id="n4300134"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic, the incarnation of the Word. Greek style often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” but English style generally does not.</p></p>
<p id="n4300135"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> This looks at the Word incarnate in humility and weakness; the word <span class="greek">σάρξ</span> (<span class="translit">sarx</span>) does not carry overtones of sinfulness here as it frequently does in Pauline usage. See also John 3:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4300136"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and tabernacled.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The Greek word translated <i>took up residence</i> (<span class="greek">σκηνόω</span>, <span class="translit">skēnoō</span>) alludes to the OT tabernacle, where the Shekinah, the visible glory of God’s presence, resided. The author is suggesting that this glory can now be seen in Jesus (note the following verse). The verb used here may imply that the Shekinah glory that once was found in the tabernacle has taken up residence in the person of Jesus. Cf. also John 2:19-21. <i>The Word became flesh</i>. This verse constitutes the most concise statement of the incarnation in the New Testament. John 1:1 makes it clear that the <i>Logos</i> was fully God, but 1:14 makes it clear that he was also fully human. A Docetic interpretation is completely ruled out. Here for the first time the <i>Logos</i> of 1:1 is identified as Jesus of Nazareth—the two are one and the same. Thus this is the last time the word <i>logos</i> is used in the Fourth Gospel to refer to the second person of the Trinity. From here on it is Jesus of Nazareth who is the focus of John’s Gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n4300137"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and we saw.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300138"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of the unique one.” Although this word is often translated “only begotten,” such a translation is misleading, since in English it appears to express a metaphysical relationship. The word in Greek was used of an only child (a son [Luke 7:12; 9:38] or a daughter [Luke 8:42]). It was also used of something unique (only one of its kind) such as the mythological Phoenix (<i>1 Clem</i>. 25:2). From here it passes easily to a description of Isaac (Heb 11:17 and Josephus, <i>Ant</i>., 1.13.1 [1.222]) who was not Abraham’s <i>only</i> son, but was one-of-a-kind because he was the child of the promise. Thus the word means “one-of-a-kind” and is reserved for Jesus in the Johannine literature of the NT. While all Christians are children of God, Jesus is God’s Son in a unique, one-of-a-kind sense. The word is used in this way in all its uses in the Gospel of John (1:14; 1:18; 3:16, and 3:18).</p></p>
<p id="n4300139"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300139">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John</i> refers to John the Baptist.</p></p>
<p id="n4300140"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bore witness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300141"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and shouted out saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4300142"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has a higher rank than I.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300143"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for from his fullness we have all received, and grace upon grace.” The meaning of the phrase <span class="greek">χάριν ἀντὶ χάριτος</span> (<span class="translit">charin anti charitos</span>) could be: (1) love (grace) under the New Covenant in place of love (grace) under the Sinai Covenant, thus replacement; (2) grace “on top of” grace, thus accumulation; (3) grace corresponding to grace, thus correspondence. The most commonly held view is (2) in one sense or another, and this is probably the best explanation. This sense is supported by a fairly well-known use in Philo, <i>Posterity</i> 43 (145). Morna D. Hooker suggested that Exod 33:13 provides the background for this expression: “Now therefore, I pray you, if I have found <span class="greek">χάρις</span> (LXX) in your sight, let me know your ways, that I may know you, so that I may find <span class="greek">χάρις</span> (LXX) in your sight.” Hooker proposed that it is this idea of favor given to one who has already received favor which lies behind 1:16, and this seems very probable as a good explanation of the meaning of the phrase (“The Johannine Prologue and the Messianic Secret,” <i>NTS</i> 21 [1974/75]: 53).</p><p><b>sn</b> Earlier commentators (including Origen and Luther) took the words <i>For we have all received from his fullness one gracious gift after another</i> to be John the Baptist’s. Most modern commentators take them as the words of the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4300144"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> “But” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the implied contrast between the Mosaic law and grace through Jesus Christ. John 1:17 seems to indicate clearly that the Old Covenant (Sinai) was being contrasted with the New. In Jewish sources the Law was regarded as a gift from God (Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 3.8.10 [3.223]; <i>Pirqe Avot</i> 1.1; <i>Sifre</i> Deut 31:4 §305). Further information can be found in T. F. Glasson, <i>Moses in the Fourth Gospel</i> (SBT).</p></p>
<p id="n4300145"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300145">45</a> <p><b>tc</b> The textual problem <span class="greek">μονογενὴς θεός</span> (<span class="translit">monogenēs theos</span>, “the only God”) versus <span class="greek">ὁ μονογενὴς υἱός</span> (<span class="translit">ho monogenēs huios</span>, “the only son”) is a notoriously difficult one. Only one letter would have differentiated the readings in the <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, since both words would have been contracted as <i>nomina sacra</i>: thus <span class="uncial">qMs</span> or <span class="uncial">uMs</span>. Externally, there are several variants, but they can be grouped essentially by whether they read <span class="greek">θεός</span> or <span class="greek">υἱός</span>. The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially the later ones (A C<sup>3</sup> <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), read <span class="greek">ὁ μονογενὴς υἱός</span>. <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> 33 have <span class="greek">ὁ μονογενὴς θεός</span>, while the anarthrous <span class="greek">μονογενὴς θεός</span> is found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B C* L. The articular <span class="greek">θεός</span> is almost certainly a scribal emendation to the anarthrous <span class="greek">θεός</span>, for <span class="greek">θεός</span> without the article is a much harder reading. The external evidence thus strongly supports <span class="greek">μονογενὴς θεός</span>. Internally, although <span class="greek">υἱός</span> fits the immediate context more readily, <span class="greek">θεός</span> is much more difficult. As well, <span class="greek">θεός</span> also explains the origin of the other reading (<span class="greek">υἱός</span>), because it is difficult to see why a scribe who found <span class="greek">υἱός</span> in the text he was copying would alter it to <span class="greek">θεός</span>. Scribes would naturally change the wording to <span class="greek">υἱός</span> however, since <span class="greek">μονογενὴς υἱός</span> is a uniquely Johannine christological title (cf. John 3:16, 18; 1 John 4:9). But <span class="greek">θεός</span> as the older and more difficult reading is preferred. As for translation, it makes the most sense to see the word <span class="greek">θεός</span> as in apposition to <span class="greek">μονογενής</span>, and the participle <span class="greek">ὁ ὤν</span> (<span class="translit">ho ōn</span>) as in apposition to <span class="greek">θεός</span>, giving in effect three descriptions of Jesus rather than only two. (B. D. Ehrman, <i>The Orthodox Corruption of Scripture</i>, 81, suggests that it is nearly impossible and completely unattested in the NT for an adjective followed immediately by a noun that agrees in gender, number, and case, to be a substantival adjective: “when is an adjective <i>ever</i> used substantivally when it immediately precedes a noun of the same inflection?” This, however, is an overstatement. First, as Ehrman admits, <span class="greek">μονογενής</span> in John 1:14 is substantival. And since it is an established usage for the adjective in this context, one might well expect that the author would continue to use the adjective substantivally four verses later. Indeed, <span class="greek">μονογενής</span> is already moving toward a crystallized substantival adjective in the NT [cf. Luke 9:38; Heb 11:17]; in patristic Greek, the process continued [cf. <i>PGL</i> 881 s.v. 7]. Second, there are several instances in the NT in which a <i>substantival</i> adjective is followed by a noun with which it has complete concord: cf., e.g., Rom 1:30; Gal 3:9; 1 Tim 1:9; 2 Pet 2:5.) The modern translations which best express this are the NEB (margin) and TEV. Several things should be noted: <span class="greek">μονογενής</span> alone, without <span class="greek">υἱός</span>, can mean “only son,” “unique son,” “unique one,” etc. (see 1:14). Furthermore, <span class="greek">θεός</span> is anarthrous. As such it carries qualitative force much like it does in 1:1c, where <span class="greek">θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος</span> (<span class="translit">theos ēn ho logos</span>) means “the Word was fully God” or “the Word was fully of the essence of deity.” Finally, <span class="greek">ὁ ὤν</span> occurs in Rev 1:4, 8; 4:8; 11:17; and 16:5, but even more significantly in the LXX of Exod 3:14. Putting all of this together leads to the translation given in the text.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “The unique one.” For the meaning of <span class="greek">μονογενής</span> (<span class="translit">monogenēs</span>) see the note on “one and only” in 1:14. </p></p>
<p id="n4300146"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the bosom of” (an idiom for closeness or nearness; cf. L&amp;N 34.18; BDAG 556 s.v. <span class="greek">κόλπος</span> 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4300147"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300148"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300148">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Has made God known</i>. In this final verse of the prologue, the climactic and ultimate statement of the earthly career of the <i>Logos</i>, Jesus of Nazareth, is reached. The unique One (John 1:14), the One who has taken on human form and nature by becoming incarnate (<i>became flesh</i>, 1:14), who is himself fully God (<i>the Word was God</i>, 1:1c) and is to be identified with the ever-living One of the Old Testament revelation (Exod 3:14), who is in intimate relationship with the Father, this One and no other has fully revealed what God is like. As Jesus said to Philip in John 14:9, “The one who has seen me has seen the Father.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300149"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic. Greek style often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” but English style generally does not.</p></p>
<p id="n4300150"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300151"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300151">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John’s</i> refers to John the Baptist.</p></p>
<p id="n4300152"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300152">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “witness.”</p><p><b>sn</b> John the Baptist’s <i>testimony</i> seems to take place over 3 days: day 1, John’s testimony about his own role is largely negative (1:19-28); day 2, John gives positive testimony about who Jesus is (1:29-34); day 3, John sends his own disciples to follow Jesus (1:35-40).</p></p>
<p id="n4300153"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300153">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” In NT usage the term <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαῖοι</span> (<span class="translit">Ioudaioi</span>) may refer to the entire Jewish people, the residents of Jerusalem and surrounding territory, the authorities in Jerusalem, or merely those who were hostile to Jesus. Here the author refers to the authorities or leaders in Jerusalem. (For further information see R. G. Bratcher, “‘The Jews’ in the Gospel of John,” <i>BT</i> 26 [1975]: 401-9.)</p></p>
<p id="n4300154"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300154">54</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several significant witnesses have <span class="greek">πρὸς αὐτόν</span> (<span class="translit">pros auton</span>, “to him”) either here (B C* 33 892<sup>c</sup> <i>al</i> it) or after “Levites” (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66c vid</sup> A <span class="greek">Θ Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 579 <i>al</i> lat), while the earliest <span class="smcaps">mss</span> as well as the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66*,75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C<sup>3</sup> L W<sup>s</sup> ƒ<sup>1</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) lack the phrase. On the one hand, <span class="greek">πρὸς αὐτόν</span> could be perceived as redundant since <span class="greek">αὐτόν</span> is used again later in the verse, thus prompting scribes to omit the phrase. On the other hand, both the variation in placement of <span class="greek">πρὸς αὐτόν</span> and the fact that this phrase rather than the latter <span class="greek">αὐτόν</span> is lacking in certain witnesses (cf. John 11:44; 14:7; 18:31), suggests that scribes felt that the sentence needed the phrase to make the sense clearer. Although a decision is difficult, the shorter reading is slightly preferred. NA<sup>28</sup> has <span class="greek">πρὸς αὐτόν</span> in brackets, indicating doubt as to the phrase’s authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300156"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300156">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>Who are you?</i>” No uniform Jewish expectation of a single eschatological figure existed in the 1st century. A majority expected the Messiah. But some pseudepigraphic books describe God’s intervention without mentioning the anointed Davidic king; in parts of <i>1 Enoch</i>, for example, the figure of the Son of Man, not the Messiah, embodies the expectations of the author. Essenes at Qumran seem to have expected three figures: a prophet, a priestly messiah, and a royal messiah. In baptizing, John the Baptist was performing an eschatological action. It also seems to have been part of his proclamation (John 1:23, 26-27). Crowds were beginning to follow him. He was operating in an area not too far from the Essene center on the Dead Sea. No wonder the authorities were curious about who he was.</p></p>
<p id="n4300157"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300157">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah” (Both Greek “Christ” and Hebrew and Aramaic “Messiah” mean “one who has been anointed”).</p><p><b>sn</b> “<i>I am not the Christ</i>.” A 3rd century work, the pseudo-Clementine <i>Recognitions</i> (1.54 and 1.60 in the Latin text; the statement is not as clear in the Syriac version) records that John’s followers proclaimed him to be the Messiah. There is no clear evidence that they did so in the 1st century, however—but Luke 3:15 indicates some wondered. Concerning the <i>Christ</i>, the term <span class="greek">χριστός</span> (<span class="translit">christos</span>) was originally an adjective (“anointed”), developing in LXX into a substantive (“an anointed one”), then developing still further into a technical generic term (“the anointed one”). In the intertestamental period it developed further into a technical term referring to the hoped-for anointed one, that is, a specific individual. In the NT the development starts there (technical-specific), is so used in the gospels, and then develops in Paul to mean virtually Jesus’ last name.</p></p>
<p id="n4300158"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300158">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “What then?” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4300159"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300159">59</a> <p><b>sn</b> According to the 1st century rabbinic interpretation of 2 Kgs 2:11, <i>Elijah</i> was still alive. In Mal 4:5 it is said that Elijah would be the precursor of Messiah. How does one reconcile John the Baptist’s denial here (<i>“I am not”</i>) with Jesus’ statements in Matt 11:14 (see also Mark 9:13 and Matt 17:12) that John the Baptist <i>was</i> Elijah? Some have attempted to remove the difficulty by a reconstruction of the text in the Gospel of John which makes the Baptist say that he was Elijah. However, external support for such emendations is lacking. According to Gregory the Great, John was <i>not</i> Elijah, but exercised toward Jesus the <i>function</i> of Elijah by preparing his way. But this avoids the real difficulty, since in John’s Gospel the question of the Jewish authorities to the Baptist concerns <i>precisely</i> his function. It has also been suggested that the author of the Gospel here preserves a historically correct reminiscence—that John the Baptist did not think of himself as Elijah, although Jesus said otherwise. Mark 6:14-16 and Mark 8:28 indicate the people and Herod both distinguished between John and Elijah—<i>probably</i> because he did not see himself as Elijah. But Jesus’ remarks in Matt 11:14, Mark 9:13, and Matt 17:12 indicate that John <i>did</i> perform the function of Elijah—John did for Jesus what Elijah was to have done for the coming of the Lord. C. F. D. Moule pointed out that it is too simple to see a straight contradiction between John’s account and that of the synoptic gospels: “We have to ask <i>by whom</i> the identification is made, and by whom refused. The synoptic gospels represent <i>Jesus</i> as identifying, or comparing, the Baptist with Elijah, while John represents the <i>Baptist</i> as rejecting the identification when it is offered him by his interviewers. Now these two, so far from being incompatible, are psychologically complementary. The Baptist humbly rejects the exalted title, but Jesus, on the contrary, bestows it on him. Why should not the two both be correct?” (<i>The Phenomenon of the New Testament</i> [SBT], 70).</p></p>
<p id="n4300160"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300160">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>Prophet</i> is a reference to the “prophet like Moses” of Deut 18:15, by this time an eschatological figure in popular belief. Acts 3:22 identifies Jesus as this prophet.</p></p>
<p id="n4300161"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300161">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “Tell us” are not in the Greek but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4300162"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300162">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (John the Baptist) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300163"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300163">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> This call to “make straight” is probably an allusion to preparation through repentance.</p></p>
<p id="n4300164"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300164">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 40:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4300165"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300165">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Pharisees</i> were members of one of the most important and influential religious and political parties of Judaism in the time of Jesus. There were more Pharisees than Sadducees (according to Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 17.2.4 [17.42] there were more than 6,000 Pharisees at about this time). Pharisees differed with Sadducees on certain doctrines and patterns of behavior. The Pharisees were strict and zealous adherents to the laws of the OT and to numerous additional traditions such as angels and bodily resurrection.</p></p>
<p id="n4300166"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300166">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4300167"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300167">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they asked him, and said to him”; the referent (John) has been specified in the translation for clarity, and the phrase has been simplified in the translation to “So they asked John.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300168"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300168">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah” (Both Greek “Christ” and Hebrew and Aramaic “Messiah” mean “one who has been anointed”).</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:20.</p></p>
<p id="n4300169"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300169">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered them, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4300170"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300170">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “know.” </p></p>
<p id="n4300171"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300171">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “of whom I am not worthy.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The humility of John is evident in the statement <i>I am not worthy</i>. This was considered one of the least worthy tasks of a slave, and John did not consider himself worthy to do even that for the one to come, despite the fact he himself was a prophet.</p></p>
<p id="n4300172"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300172">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term refers to the leather strap or thong used to bind a sandal. This is often viewed as a collective singular and translated as a plural, “the straps of his sandals,” but it may be more emphatic to retain the singular here.</p></p>
<p id="n4300173"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300173">73</a> <p><b>tc</b> Many witnesses ([<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup>] C<sup>2</sup> K T <span class="greek">Ψ</span><sup>c</sup> 083 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <i>pm</i> sa Or) read <span class="greek">Βηθαβαρᾷ</span> (<span class="translit">Bēthabara</span>, “Bethabara”) instead of <span class="greek">Βηθανίᾳ</span> (<span class="translit">Bēthania</span>, “Bethany”). But the reading <span class="greek">Βηθανίᾳ</span> is strongly supported by <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> A B C* L W<sup>s</sup> <span class="greek">Δ Θ Ψ</span>* 565 579 700 1241 1424 <i>pm</i> latt bo as well as several fathers. Since there is no known Bethany “beyond the Jordan,” it is likely that the name would have been changed to a more etymologically edifying one (Origen mistakenly thought the name Bethabara meant “house of preparation” and for this reason was appropriate in this context; see <i>TCGNT</i> 171 for discussion). On the other hand, both since Origen’s understanding of the Semitic etymology of Bethabara was incorrect, and because Bethany was at least a well-known location in Palestine, mentioned in the Gospels about a dozen times, one has to wonder whether scribes replaced <span class="greek">Βηθαβαρᾷ</span> with <span class="greek">Βηθανίᾳ</span>. However, if Origen’s understanding of the etymology of the name was representative, scribes may have altered the text in the direction of Bethabara. And even if most scribes were unfamiliar with what the name might signify, that a reading which did not contradict the Gospels’ statements of a Bethany near Jerusalem was already at hand may have been sufficient reason for them to adopt Bethabara. Further, in light of the very strong testimony for <span class="greek">Βηθανίᾳ</span>, this reading should be regarded as authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n4300174"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300174">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> “River” is not in the Greek text but is supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300175"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300175">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (John) has been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300176"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300176">76</a> <p><b>sn</b> Gen 22:8 is an important passage in the background of the title <i>Lamb of God</i> as applied to Jesus. In Jewish thought this was held to be a supremely important sacrifice. G. Vermès stated: “For the Palestinian Jew, all lamb sacrifice, and especially the Passover lamb and the Tamid offering, was a memorial of the Akedah with its effects of deliverance, forgiveness of sin and messianic salvation” (<i>Scripture and Tradition in Judaism</i> [StPB], 225).</p></p>
<p id="n4300177"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300177">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has a higher rank than I.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300178"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300178">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “know.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300179"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300179">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> John the Baptist, who has been so reluctant to elaborate his own role, now more than willingly gives his testimony about Jesus. For the author, the emphasis is totally on John the Baptist as a witness to Jesus. No attention is given to the Baptist’s call to national repentance and very little to his baptizing. Everything is focused on what he has to say about Jesus: <i>so that he could be revealed to Israel</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4300180"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300180">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events in the narrative. Greek style often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” but English style generally does not.</p></p>
<p id="n4300181"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300181">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “testified, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4300182"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300182">82</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>like a dove</i> is a descriptive comparison. The Spirit is not a dove, but descended like one in some sort of bodily representation.</p></p>
<p id="n4300183"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300183">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from the sky.” The Greek word <span class="greek">οὐρανός</span> (<span class="translit">ouranos</span>) may be translated “sky” or “heaven,” depending on the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4300184"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300184">84</a> <p><b>sn</b> John says the Spirit <i>remained on</i> Jesus. The Greek verb <span class="greek">μένω</span> (<span class="translit">menō</span>) is a favorite Johannine word, used 40 times in the Gospel and 27 times in the Epistles (67 together) against 118 times total in the NT. The general significance of the verb <span class="greek">μένω</span> for John is to express the permanency of relationship between Father and Son and Son and believer. Here the use of the word implies that Jesus permanently possesses the Holy Spirit, and because he does, he will dispense the Holy Spirit to others in baptism. Other notes on the dispensation of the Spirit occur at John 3:5 and following (at least implied by the wordplay), John 3:34; 7:38-39, numerous passages in John 14-16 (the Paraclete passages) and John 20:22. Note also the allusion to Isa 42:1—“Behold my servant…my chosen one in whom my soul delights. I have put my Spirit on him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300185"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300185">85</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ What did John the Baptist declare about Jesus on this occasion? Did he say, “This is the Son of God” (<span class="greek">οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">houtos estin ho huios tou theou</span>), or “This is the Chosen One of God” (<span class="greek">οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ἐκλεκτὸς τοῦ θεοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">houtos estin ho eklektos tou theou</span>)? The majority of the witnesses, impressive because of their diversity in age and locales, read “This is the Son of God” (so <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> A B C L <span class="greek">Θ Ψ</span> 0233<sup>vid</sup> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 1241 aur c f l q bo as well as the majority of Byzantine minuscules and many others). Most scholars take this to be sufficient evidence to regard the issue as settled without much of a need to reflect on internal evidence. On the other hand, one of the earliest <span class="smcaps">mss</span> for this verse, <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>5</sup> (3rd century), evidently read <span class="greek">οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ἐκλεκτὸς τοῦ θεοῦ</span>. (There is a gap in the ms at the point of the disputed words; it is too large for <span class="greek">υἱός</span> especially if written, as it surely would have been, as a <i>nomen sacrum</i> [<span class="uncial">uMs</span>]. The term <span class="greek">ἐκλεκτός</span> was not a <i>nomen sacrum</i> and would have therefore taken up much more space [<span class="uncial">eklektos</span>]. Given these two variants, there is hardly any question as to what <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>5</sup> read.) This papyrus has many affinities with <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*, which here also has <span class="greek">ὁ ἐκλεκτός</span>. In addition to their combined testimony <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>106vid</sup> b e ff<sup>2*</sup> sy<sup>s,c</sup> also support this reading. <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>106</sup> is particularly impressive, for it is a second third-century papyrus in support of <span class="greek">ὁ ἐκλεκτός</span>. A third reading combines these two: “the elect Son” (<i>electus filius</i> in ff<sup>2c</sup> sa and a [with slight variation]). Although the evidence for <span class="greek">ἐκλεκτός</span> is not as impressive as that for <span class="greek">υἱός</span>, the reading is found in early Alexandrian and Western witnesses. Turning to the internal evidence, “the Chosen One” clearly comes out ahead. “Son of God” is a favorite expression of the author (cf. 1:49; 3:18; 5:25; 10:36; 11:4, 27; 19:7; 20:31); further, there are several other references to “his Son,” “the Son,” etc. Scribes would be naturally motivated to change <span class="greek">ἐκλεκτός</span> to <span class="greek">υἱός</span> since the latter is both a Johannine expression and is, on the surface, richer theologically in 1:34. On the other hand, there is not a sufficient reason for scribes to change <span class="greek">υἱός</span> to <span class="greek">ἐκλεκτός</span>. The term never occurs in John; even its verbal cognate (<span class="greek">ἐκλέγω</span>, <span class="translit">eklegō</span>) is never affirmed of Jesus in this Gospel. <span class="greek">ἐκλεκτός</span> clearly best explains the rise of <span class="greek">υἱός</span>. Further, the third reading (“Chosen Son of God”) is patently a conflation of the other two. It has all the earmarks of adding <span class="greek">υἱός</span> to <span class="greek">ἐκλεκτός</span>. Thus, <span class="greek">ὁ</span> <span class="greek">υἱός τοῦ θεοῦ</span> is almost certainly a motivated reading. As R. E. Brown notes (<i>John</i> [AB], 1:57), “On the basis of theological tendency…it is difficult to imagine that Christian scribes would change ‘the Son of God’ to ‘God’s chosen one,’ while a change in the opposite direction would be quite plausible. Harmonization with the Synoptic accounts of the baptism (‘You are [This is] my beloved <i>Son</i>’) would also explain the introduction of ‘the Son of God’ into John; the same phenomenon occurs in vi 69. Despite the weaker textual evidence, therefore, it seems best—with Lagrange, Barrett, Boismard, and others—to accept ‘God’s chosen one’ as original.” </p></p>
<p id="n4300186"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300186">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John</i> refers to John the Baptist.</p></p>
<p id="n4300187"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300187">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> “There” is not in the Greek text but is implied by current English idiom.</p></p>
<p id="n4300188"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300188">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> This section (1:35-51) is joined to the preceding by the literary expedient of repeating the Baptist’s testimony about Jesus being the <i>Lamb of God</i> (1:36, cf. 1:29). This repeated testimony (1:36) no longer has revelatory value in itself, since it has been given before; its purpose, instead, is to institute a chain reaction which will bring John the Baptist’s disciples to Jesus and make them Jesus’ own disciples.</p></p>
<p id="n4300189"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300189">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (John) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300190"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300190">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the two disciples heard him speaking.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300191"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300191">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>followed Jesus</i> pictures discipleship, which means that to learn from Jesus is to follow him as the guiding priority of one’s life.</p></p>
<p id="n4300192"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300192">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “What are you seeking?”</p></p>
<p id="n4300193"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300193">93</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4300194"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300194">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300195"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300195">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to them.” </p></p>
<p id="n4300196"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300196">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about the tenth hour.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>About four o’clock in the afternoon</i>. What system of time reckoning is the author using? B. F. Westcott thought John, unlike the synoptic gospels, was using Roman time, which started at midnight (<i>St. John</i>, 282). This would make the time 10 a.m., which would fit here. But later in the Gospel’s Passover account (John 19:14, where the sixth hour is on the “eve of the Passover”) it seems clear the author had to be using Jewish reckoning, which began at 6 a.m. This would make the time here in 1:39 to be 4 p.m. This may be significant: If the hour was late, Andrew and the unnamed disciple probably spent the night in the same house where Jesus was staying, and the events of 1:41-42 took place on the next day. The evidence for Westcott’s view, that the Gospel is using Roman time, is very slim. The Roman reckoning which started at midnight was only used by authorities as legal time (for contracts, official documents, etc.). Otherwise, the Romans too reckoned time from 6 a.m. (e.g., Roman sundials are marked VI, not XII, for noon).</p></p>
<p id="n4300197"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300197">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who heard from John.”</p></p>
<p id="n4300198"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300198">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4300199"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n4300199">99</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* L W<sup>s</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) read <span class="greek">πρῶτος</span> (<span class="translit">prōtos</span>) here instead of <span class="greek">πρῶτον</span> (<span class="translit">prōton</span>). The former reading would be a predicate adjective and suggest that Andrew “was the first” person to proselytize another regarding Jesus. The reading preferred, however, is the neuter <span class="greek">πρῶτον</span>, used as an adverb (BDAG 893 s.v. <span class="greek">πρῶτος</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">β</span>.), and it suggests that the first thing that Andrew did was to proselytize Peter. The evidence for this reading is early and weighty: <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A B <span class="greek">Θ Ψ</span> 083 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 892 <i>al</i> lat. </p></p>
<p id="n43001100"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001100">100</a> <p><b>sn</b> Naturally part of Andrew’s concept of the <i>Messiah</i> would have been learned from John the Baptist (v. 40). However, there were a number of different messianic expectations in 1st century Palestine (see the note on <i>“Who are you?”</i> in v. 19), and it would be wrong to assume that what Andrew meant here is the same thing the author means in the purpose statement at the end of the Fourth Gospel, 20:31. The issue here is not whether the disciples’ initial faith in Jesus as Messiah was genuine or not, but whether their concept of who Jesus was grew and developed progressively as they spent time following him, until finally after his resurrection it is affirmed in the climactic statement of John’s Gospel, the affirmation of Thomas in 20:28. </p></p>
<p id="n43001101"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> Both Greek “Christ” and Hebrew and Aramaic “Messiah” mean “the one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author. See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 1:20.</p></p>
<p id="n43001102"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He brought him”; both referents (Andrew, Simon) have been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n43001103"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001103">103</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading “Simon, son of John” is well attested in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>66,75,106</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B* L 33 it co. The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A B<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) read “Simon, the son of Jonah” here instead, but that is perhaps an assimilation to Matt 16:17.</p></p>
<p id="n43001104"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001104">104</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author. Giving <i>Simon</i> the name of <i>Cephas</i> is indicative of the future role he will play. Only John among the gospel writers gives the Greek transliteration (<span class="greek">Κηφᾶς</span>, <span class="translit">Kēphas</span>) of Simon’s new name, <i>Qéphâ</i> (which is Galilean Aramaic). Neither <span class="greek">Πέτρος</span> (<span class="translit">Petros</span>) in Greek nor <i>Qéphâ</i> in Aramaic is a normal proper name; it is more like a nickname.</p></p>
<p id="n43001105"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Jesus is best taken as the subject of <span class="greek">εὑρίσκει</span> (<span class="translit">heuriskei</span>), since Peter would scarcely have wanted to go to Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n43001106"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001106">106</a> <p><b>sn</b> No explanation is given for why Jesus <i>wanted to set out for Galilee</i>, but probably he wanted to go to the wedding at Cana (about a two day trip).</p></p>
<p id="n43001107"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n43001108"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and Jesus said.”</p></p>
<p id="n43001109"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001109">109</a> <p><b>sn</b> Although the author thought of the town as in Galilee (12:21), <i>Bethsaida</i> technically was in Gaulanitis (Philip the Tetrarch’s territory) across from Herod’s Galilee. There may have been two places called Bethsaida, or this may merely reflect popular imprecision—locally it was considered part of Galilee, even though it was just east of the Jordan river. This territory was heavily Gentile (which may explain why Andrew and Philip both have Gentile names).</p></p>
<p id="n43001110"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> Probably <span class="greek">ἀπό</span> (<span class="translit">apo</span>) indicates “originally from” in the sense of hometown rather than current residence; Mark 1:21, 29 seems to locate the home of Andrew and Peter at Capernaum. The entire remark (v. 44) amounts to a parenthetical comment by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n43001111"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001111">111</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Nathanael</i> is traditionally identified with Bartholomew (although John never describes him as such). He appears here after <i>Philip</i>; in all lists of the twelve except in Acts 1:13, Bartholomew follows Philip. Also, the Aramaic <i>Bar-tolmai</i> means “son of Tolmai,” the surname; the man almost certainly had another name. Other alternatives than Bartholomew have also been suggested, e.g. James the son of Alphaeus; see C. E. Hill, “The Identity of John’s Nathanael,” <i>JSNT</i> 20 (1998): 45-61.</p></p>
<p id="n43001112"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Also” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n43001113"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Nathanael.”</p></p>
<p id="n43001114"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to him.” </p></p>
<p id="n43001115"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001115">115</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Can anything good come out of Nazareth?</i> may be a local proverb expressing jealousy among the towns.</p></p>
<p id="n43001116"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Philip said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n43001117"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said about him.” </p></p>
<p id="n43001118"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “treachery.”</p><p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 32:2.</p></p>
<p id="n43001119"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered and said to him.” This is somewhat redundant in English and has been simplified in the translation to “replied.”</p></p>
<p id="n43001120"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001120">120</a> <p><b>sn</b> Many have speculated about what Nathanael was doing under the <i>fig tree</i>. Meditating on the Messiah who was to come? A good possibility, since the fig tree was used as shade for teaching or studying by the later rabbis (<i>Ecclesiastes Rabbah</i> 5:11). Also, the fig tree was symbolic for messianic peace and plenty (Mic 4:4, Zech 3:10.)</p></p>
<p id="n43001121"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although <span class="greek">βασιλεύς</span> (<span class="translit">basileus</span>) lacks the article it is definite due to contextual and syntactical considerations. See <i>ExSyn</i> 263.</p></p>
<p id="n43001122"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001122">122</a> <p><b>sn</b> Nathanael’s confession—<i>You are the Son of God; you are the King of Israel</i>—is best understood as a confession of Jesus’ messiahship. It has strong allusions to Ps 2:6-7, a well-known messianic psalm. What Nathanael’s exact understanding was at this point is hard to determine, but “son of God” was a designation for the Davidic king in the OT, and Nathanael parallels it with <i>King of Israel</i> here.</p></p>
<p id="n43001123"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered and said to him.” This has been simplified in the translation to “said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n43001124"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001124">124</a> <p><b>sn</b> What are the <i>greater things</i> Jesus had in mind? In the narrative this forms an excellent foreshadowing of the miraculous signs which began at Cana of Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n43001125"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n43001126"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly, truly, I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n43001127"><a href="file1041.xhtml#n43001127">127</a> <p><b>sn</b> The title <i>Son of Man</i> appears 13 times in John’s Gospel. It is associated especially with the themes of crucifixion (3:14; 8:28), revelation (6:27; 6:53), and eschatological authority (5:27; 9:35). The title as used in John’s Gospel has for its background the son of man figure who appears in Dan 7:13-14 and is granted universal regal authority. Thus for the author, the emphasis in this title is not on Jesus’ humanity, but on his heavenly origin and divine authority.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
