<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Mark 7</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 7</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Breaking Human Traditions </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:1</span> Now<sup><a id="n410071" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n410071">1</a></sup> the Pharisees<sup><a id="n410072" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n410072">2</a></sup> and some of the experts in the law<sup><a id="n410073" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n410073">3</a></sup> who came from Jerusalem gathered around him. <span class="verse">7:2</span> And they saw that some of Jesus’ disciples<sup><a id="n410075" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n410075">5</a></sup> ate their bread with unclean hands, that is, unwashed. <span class="verse">7:3</span> (For the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they perform a ritual washing,<sup><a id="n410076" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n410076">6</a></sup> holding fast to the tradition of the elders. <span class="verse">7:4</span> And when they come from the marketplace,<sup><a id="n410077" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n410077">7</a></sup> they do not eat unless they wash. They hold fast to many other traditions: the washing of cups, pots, kettles, and dining couches.<sup><a id="n410078" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n410078">8</a></sup>)<sup><a id="n410079" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n410079">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:5</span> The Pharisees and the experts in the law asked him, “Why do your disciples not live according to the tradition of the elders, but eat<sup><a id="n4100710" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100710">10</a></sup> with unwashed hands?” <span class="verse">7:6</span> He said to them, “Isaiah prophesied correctly about you hypocrites, as it is written:</p>
<p class="otpoetry">‘<b><i>This people honors me with their lips,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>but their heart</i></b><sup><a id="n4100711" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100711">11</a></sup> <i><b>is far from me</b></i>.</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">7:7</span> <b><i>They worship me in vain,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>teaching as doctrine the commandments of men</b></i>.’<sup><a id="n4100712" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100712">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodyblock"><span class="verse">7:8</span> Having no regard<sup><a id="n4100713" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100713">13</a></sup> for the command of God, you hold fast to human tradition.”<sup><a id="n4100714" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100714">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:9</span> He also said to them, “You neatly reject the commandment of God in order to set up<sup><a id="n4100715" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100715">15</a></sup> your tradition. <span class="verse">7:10</span> For Moses said, ‘<b><i>Honor your father and your mother</i></b>,’<sup><a id="n4100716" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100716">16</a></sup> and, ‘<i><b>Whoever insults his father or mother must be put to death</b></i>.’<sup><a id="n4100717" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100717">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:11</span> But you say that if anyone tells his father or mother, ‘Whatever help you would have received from me is <i>corban</i>’<sup><a id="n4100718" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100718">18</a></sup> (that is, a gift for God), <span class="verse">7:12</span> then you no longer permit him to do anything for his father or mother. <span class="verse">7:13</span> Thus you nullify<sup><a id="n4100719" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100719">19</a></sup> the word of God by your tradition that you have handed down. And you do many things like this.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:14</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100720" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100720">20</a></sup> he called the crowd again and said to them, “Listen to me, everyone, and understand. <span class="verse">7:15</span> There is nothing outside of a person that can defile him by going into him. Rather, it is what comes out of a person that defiles him.”<sup><a id="n4100721" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100721">21</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:17</span> Now<sup><a id="n4100722" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100722">22</a></sup> when Jesus<sup><a id="n4100723" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100723">23</a></sup> had left the crowd and entered the house, his disciples asked him about the parable. <span class="verse">7:18</span> He said to them, “Are you so foolish? Don’t you understand that whatever goes into a person from outside cannot defile him? <span class="verse">7:19</span> For it does not enter his heart but his stomach, and then goes out into the sewer.”<sup><a id="n4100724" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100724">24</a></sup> (This means all foods are clean.)<sup><a id="n4100725" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100725">25</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:20</span> He said, “What comes out of a person defiles him. <span class="verse">7:21</span> For from within, out of the human heart, come evil ideas, sexual immorality, theft, murder, <span class="verse">7:22</span> adultery, greed, evil, deceit, debauchery, envy, slander, pride, and folly. <span class="verse">7:23</span> All these evils come from within and defile a person.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Syrophoenician Woman’s Faith </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:24</span> After Jesus<sup><a id="n4100726" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100726">26</a></sup> left there, he went to the region of Tyre.<sup><a id="n4100727" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100727">27</a></sup> When he went into a house, he did not want anyone to know, but<sup><a id="n4100728" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100728">28</a></sup> he was not able to escape notice. <span class="verse">7:25</span> Instead, a woman whose young daughter had an unclean spirit<sup><a id="n4100729" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100729">29</a></sup> immediately heard about him and came and fell at his feet. <span class="verse">7:26</span> The woman was a Greek, of Syrophoenician origin. She<sup><a id="n4100730" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100730">30</a></sup> asked him to cast the demon out of her daughter. <span class="verse">7:27</span> He said to her, “Let the children be satisfied first, for it is not right to take the children’s bread and to throw it to the dogs.”<sup><a id="n4100731" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100731">31</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:28</span> She answered, “Yes, Lord, but even the dogs under the table eat the children’s crumbs.” <span class="verse">7:29</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100732" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100732">32</a></sup> he said to her, “Because you said this, you may go. The demon has left your daughter.” <span class="verse">7:30</span> She went home and found the child lying on the bed, and the demon gone. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing a Deaf Mute </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">7:31</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100733" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100733">33</a></sup> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100734" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100734">34</a></sup> went out again from the region of Tyre and came through Sidon to the Sea of Galilee in the region of the Decapolis.<sup><a id="n4100737" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100737">37</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:32</span> They brought to him a deaf man who had difficulty speaking, and they asked him to place his hands on him. <span class="verse">7:33</span> After Jesus<sup><a id="n4100738" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100738">38</a></sup> took him aside privately, away from the crowd, he put his fingers in the man’s<sup><a id="n4100739" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100739">39</a></sup> ears, and after spitting, he touched his tongue.<sup><a id="n4100740" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100740">40</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:34</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100741" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100741">41</a></sup> he looked up to heaven and said with a sigh, “<i>Ephphatha</i>” (that is, “Be opened”).<sup><a id="n4100742" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100742">42</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:35</span> And immediately the man’s<sup><a id="n4100743" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100743">43</a></sup> ears were opened, his tongue loosened, and he spoke plainly. <span class="verse">7:36</span> Jesus ordered them not to tell anyone. But as much as he ordered them not to do this, they proclaimed it all the more.<sup><a id="n4100744" href="file1005_notes.xhtml#n4100744">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">7:37</span> People were completely astounded and said, “He has done everything well. He even makes the deaf hear and the mute speak.” </p>

</body>
</html>