<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 11</h2>
<p id="n660111"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n660111">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n660112"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n660112">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a reed” (but these were used for measuring). Cf. Ezek 40:3ff.</p></p>
<p id="n660113"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n660113">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n660114"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n660114">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n660115"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n660115">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">αὐλήν</span> (<span class="translit">aulēn</span>) BDAG 150 s.v. <span class="greek">αὐλή</span> 1 states, “(<i>outer</i>) <i>court</i> of the temple…Rv 11:2.”</p></p>
<p id="n660116"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n660116">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The precise meaning of the phrase <span class="greek">ἔκβαλε ἔξωθεν</span> (<span class="translit">ekbale exōthen</span>) is difficult to determine.</p></p>
<p id="n660117"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n660117">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the nations” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n660118"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n660118">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>holy city</i> appears to be a reference to Jerusalem. See also Luke 21:24.</p></p>
<p id="n660119"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n660119">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “authority” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. “Power” would be another alternative that could be supplied here.</p></p>
<p id="n6601110"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601110">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> This description is parenthetical in nature.</p></p>
<p id="n6601111"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601112"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a collective singular in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n6601113"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> See L&amp;N 20.45 for the translation of <span class="greek">κατεσθίω</span> (<span class="translit">katesthiō</span>) as “to destroy utterly, to consume completely.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601114"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601115"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “authority.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601116"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the days.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601117"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601118"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “authority.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601119"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601120"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “be victorious over”; traditionally, “overcome.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601121"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601122"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">πλατεῖα</span> (<span class="translit">plateia</span>) refers to a major (broad) street (L&amp;N 1.103).</p></p>
<p id="n6601123"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “spiritually.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601124"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “every” is not in the Greek text, but is implied by the following list.</p></p>
<p id="n6601125"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated before this and the following items in the list, since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n6601126"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to be buried.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601127"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6601128"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fell upon.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601129"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601130"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though the nearest antecedent to the subject of <span class="greek">ἤκουσαν</span> (<span class="translit">ēkousan</span>) is the people (“those who were watching them”), it could also be (based on what immediately follows) that the two prophets are the ones who heard the voice.</p></p>
<p id="n6601131"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the two prophets) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6601132"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) seems to be introducing a temporal clause contemporaneous in time with the preceding clause.</p></p>
<p id="n6601133"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601134"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seven thousand names of men.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601135"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has passed.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601136"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601137"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601138"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601139"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601139">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they fell down on their faces.” BDAG 815 s.v. <span class="greek">πίπτω</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span>. has “<i>fall down, throw oneself to the ground</i> as a sign of devotion or humility, before high-ranking persons or divine beings.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601140"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601141"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this word BDAG 755 s.v. <span class="greek">παντοκράτωρ</span> states, “the <i>Almighty, All-Powerful, Omnipotent</i> (<i>One</i>) only of God…(<span class="greek">ὁ</span>)<span class="greek"> κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ π</span>.…Rv 1:8; 4:8; 11:17; 15:3; 16:7; 21:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601142"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> The aorist verb <span class="greek">ἐβασίλευσας</span> (<span class="translit">ebasileusas</span>) has been translated ingressively.</p></p>
<p id="n6601143"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6601144"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The Gentiles” (the same Greek word may be translated “Gentiles” or “nations”).</p></p>
<p id="n6601145"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n6601146"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n6601147"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who fear.”</p></p>
<p id="n6601148"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601148">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the time has come” do not occur except at the beginning of the verse; the phrase has been repeated for emphasis and contrast. The Greek has one finite verb (“has come”) with a compound subject (“your wrath,” “the time”), followed by three infinitive clauses (“to be judged,” “to give,” “to destroy”). The rhetorical power of the repetition of the finite verb in English thus emulates the rhetorical power of its lone instance in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n6601149"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who deprave.” There is a possible wordplay here on two meanings for <span class="greek">διαφθείρω</span> (<span class="translit">diaphtheirō</span>), with the first meaning “destroy” and the second meaning either “to ruin” or “to make morally corrupt.” See L&amp;N 20.40.</p></p>
<p id="n6601150"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6601151"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601151">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sounds,” “voices.” It is not entirely clear what this refers to. BDAG 1071 s.v. <span class="greek">φωνή</span> 1 states, “In Rv we have <span class="greek">ἀστραπαὶ καὶ φωναὶ καὶ βρονταί</span> (cp. Ex 19:16) 4:5; 8:5; 11:19; 16:18 (are certain other sounds in nature thought of here in addition to thunder, as e.g. the roar of the storm?…).”</p></p>
<p id="n6601152"><a href="file1244.xhtml#n6601152">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although BDAG 1075 s.v. <span class="greek">χάλαζα</span> gives the meaning “hail” here, it is not clear whether the adjective <span class="greek">μεγάλη</span> (<span class="translit">megalē</span>) refers to the intensity of the storm or the size of the individual hailstones, or both.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
