<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 10</h2>
<p id="n420101"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n420101">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after these things.” Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n420102"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n420102">2</a> <p><b>tc</b> There is a difficult textual problem here and in v. 17, where the number is either “seventy” (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C L W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ξ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> and several church fathers and early versions) or “seventy-two” (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>75</sup> B D 0181 lat as well as other versions and fathers). The more difficult reading is “seventy-two,” since scribes would be prone to assimilate this passage to several OT passages that refer to groups of seventy people (Num 11:13-17; Deut 10:22; Judg 8:30; 2 Kgs 10:1 <i>et al</i>.); this reading also has slightly better ms support. “Seventy” could be the preferred reading if scribes drew from the tradition of the number of translators of the LXX, which the <i>Letter of Aristeas</i> puts at seventy-two (<i>TCGNT</i> 127), although this is far less likely. All things considered, “seventy-two” is a much more difficult reading and accounts for the rise of the other. Only Luke notes a second larger mission like the one in 9:1-6.</p></p>
<p id="n420103"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n420103">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “city.”</p></p>
<p id="n420104"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n420104">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n420105"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n420105">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>Lord of the harvest</i> recognizes God’s sovereignty over the harvest process.</p></p>
<p id="n420106"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n420106">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to thrust out.” </p></p>
<p id="n420107"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n420107">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold I.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n420108"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n420108">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the imagery of <i>lambs</i> see Isa 40:11, Ezek 34:11-31, and John 10:1-18. For more on <i>sheep</i> imagery see H. Preisker and S. Schulz, <i>TDNT</i> 6:690.</p></p>
<p id="n420109"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n420109">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> This imagery of <i>wolves</i> is found in intertestamental Judaism (see <i>Pss. Sol</i>. 8:23, 30; also <i>1 Enoch</i> 89:55). The imagery of <i>lambs surrounded by wolves</i> suggests violence, and may hint at coming persecution of disciples.</p></p>
<p id="n4201010"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201010">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the command <i>Do not carry</i> see Luke 9:3. The travel instructions communicate a note of urgency and stand in contrast to philosophical teachers, who often took a bag. There is no ostentation in this ministry.</p></p>
<p id="n4201011"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201011">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “a purse.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201012"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201012">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or possibly “a beggar’s bag” (L&amp;N 6.145; BDAG 811 s.v. <span class="greek">πήρα</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4201013"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201013">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “no one along the way.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201014"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201014">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201015"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201015">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Into whatever house you enter.” This acts as a distributive, meaning every house they enter; this is expressed more naturally in English as “whenever you enter a house.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201016"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201016">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> The statement ‘<i>May peace be on this house!</i>’ is really a benediction, asking for God’s blessing. The requested <i>shalom</i> (peace) is understood as coming from God.</p></p>
<p id="n4201017"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201017">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a son of peace,” a Hebrew idiom for a person of a certain class or kind, as specified by the following genitive construction (in this case, “of peace”). Such constructions are discussed further in L&amp;N 9.4. Here the expression refers to someone who responds positively to the disciples’ message, like “wisdom’s child” in Luke 7:35.</p></p>
<p id="n4201018"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201018">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> The response to these messengers determines how God’s blessing is bestowed—if they are not welcomed with <i>peace</i>, their blessing <i>will return</i> to them. Jesus shows just how important their mission is by this remark.</p></p>
<p id="n4201019"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201019">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201020"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201020">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “eating and drinking the things from them” (an idiom for what the people in the house provide the guests).</p></p>
<p id="n4201021"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201021">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the phrase <i>the worker deserves his pay</i> see 1 Tim 5:18 and 1 Cor 9:14.</p></p>
<p id="n4201022"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201022">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And whatever town you enter,” but this is more often expressed in English as “whenever you enter a town.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201023"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201023">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “city.” Jesus now speaks of the town as a whole, as he will in vv. 10-12.</p></p>
<p id="n4201024"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201024">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and they”; the referent (the people who live in the town) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201025"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201025">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p><p><b>sn</b> Ministry (<i>heal the sick</i>) is to take place where it is well received (note <i>welcome</i> in the preceding verse).</p></p>
<p id="n4201026"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201026">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in it”; the referent (that town) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201027"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201027">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself. See Luke 6:20; 11:20; 17:20-21.</p></p>
<p id="n4201028"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201028">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “come <i>near to</i> you,” suggesting the approach (but not arrival) of the kingdom. But the combination of the perfect tense of <span class="greek">ἐγγίζω</span> (<span class="translit">engizō</span>) with the preposition <span class="greek">ἐπί</span> (<span class="translit">epi</span>) most likely suggests that the sense is “has come upon” (see BDAG 270 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐγγίζω</span> 2; W. R. Hutton, “The Kingdom of God Has Come,” <i>ExpTim</i> 64 [Dec 1952]: 89-91; and D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> [BECNT], 2:1000; cf. also NAB “is at hand for you”). These passages argue that a key element of the kingdom is its ability to overcome the power of Satan and those elements in the creation that oppose humanity. Confirmation of this understanding comes in v. 18 and in Luke 11:14-23, especially the parable of vv. 21-23.</p></p>
<p id="n4201029"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201029">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whatever town you enter,” but this is more often expressed in English as “whenever you enter a town.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201030"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201030">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “city.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201031"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201031">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and they”; the referent (the people who live in the town) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201032"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201032">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> More discussion takes place concerning rejection (<i>the people do not welcome you</i>), as these verses lead into the condemnation of certain towns for their rejection of God’s kingdom.</p></p>
<p id="n4201033"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201033">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">πλατεῖα</span> (<span class="translit">plateia</span>) refers to the “broad street,” so this refers to the main roads of the town.</p></p>
<p id="n4201034"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201034">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “city.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201035"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201035">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Luke 9:5, where the verb is different but the meaning is the same. This was a sign of rejection.</p></p>
<p id="n4201036"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201036">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ὑμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">humin</span>) has been translated as a dative of disadvantage.</p></p>
<p id="n4201037"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201037">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has come near.” As in v. 9 (see above), the combination of <span class="greek">ἐγγίζω</span> (<span class="translit">engizō</span>) with the preposition <span class="greek">ἐπί</span> (<span class="translit">epi</span>) is decisive in showing that the sense is “has come” (see BDAG 270 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐγγίζω</span> 2, and W. R. Hutton, “The Kingdom of God Has Come,” <i>ExpTim</i> 64 [Dec 1952]: 89-91).</p></p>
<p id="n4201038"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201038">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> The noun “Sodom” is in emphatic position in the Greek text.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Sodom</i> (and Gomorrah) were widely regarded as the most wicked of OT cities from the actions described in Gen 19:1-29; even in OT times their wickedness had become proverbial (Isa 1:9-10). The allusion to God’s judgment on these cities is not intended to indicate that they might be shown mercy on the day of judgment, but to warn that rejecting the messengers with their current message about the coming kingdom is even more serious than the worst sins of Sodom and Gomorrah and will result in even more severe punishment.</p></p>
<p id="n4201039"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201039">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “city.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201040"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201040">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Chorazin</i> was a town of Galilee that was probably fairly small in contrast to <i>Bethsaida</i> and is otherwise unattested. Bethsaida was more significant; it was declared a <i>polis</i> (“city”) by the tetrarch Herod Philip, sometime after <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 30.</p></p>
<p id="n4201041"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201041">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> This introduces a second class (contrary to fact) condition in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n4201042"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201042">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “powerful deeds.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201044"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201044">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Tyre and Sidon</i> are two other notorious OT cities (Isa 23; Jer 25:22; 47:4). The remark is a severe rebuke, in effect: “Even the hardened sinners of the old era would have responded to the proclamation of the kingdom and repented, unlike you!”</p></p>
<p id="n4201045"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201045">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> To clothe oneself in <i>sackcloth and ashes</i> was a public sign of mourning or lament, in this case for past behavior and associated with repentance.</p></p>
<p id="n4201046"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201046">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ general point is that in the day of judgment the Gentile cities will come off better than the cities of Galilee. This is not to indicate toleration for the sins of the Gentile cities, but to show how badly the judgment will go for the Galilean ones. In the OT prophetic oracles were pronounced repeatedly against Tyre and Sidon: Isa 23:1-18; Ezek 26:1-28:26; Joel 4:4; Zech 9:2-4.</p></p>
<p id="n4201047"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201047">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Capernaum</i> was a town located on the northwest shore of the Sea of Galilee, 680 ft (204 m) below sea level. It existed since Hasmonean times and was a major trade and economic center in the North Galilean region. The population in the first century is estimated to be around 1,500. Capernaum became the hub of operations for Jesus’ Galilean ministry (Matt 4:13; Mark 2:1). In modern times the site was discovered in 1838 by the American explorer E. Robinson, and major excavations began in 1905 by German archaeologists H. Kohl and C. Watzinger. Not until 1968, however, were remains from the time of Jesus visible; in that year V. Corbo and S. Loffreda began a series of annual archaeological campaigns that lasted until 1985. This work uncovered what is thought to be the house of Simon Peter as well as ruins of the first century synagogue beneath the later synagogue from the fourth or fifth century A.D. Today gently rolling hills and date palms frame the first century site, a favorite tourist destination of visitors to the Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n4201048"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201048">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> The interrogative particle introducing this question expects a negative reply.</p></p>
<p id="n4201049"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201049">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> In the OT, <i>Hades</i> was known as <i>Sheol</i>. It is the place where the unrighteous will reside (Matt 11:23; Luke 16:23; Rev 20:13-14).</p></p>
<p id="n4201050"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201050">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hears you,” but as the context of vv. 8-9 makes clear, it is response that is the point. In contemporary English, “listen to” is one way to express this function (L&amp;N 31.56).</p></p>
<p id="n4201051"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201051">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus linked himself to the disciples’ message: Responding to the disciples (<i>listens to you</i>) counts as responding to him.</p></p>
<p id="n4201052"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201052">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> The double mention of rejection in this clause—<span class="greek">ἀθετῶν ἀθετεῖ</span> (<span class="translit">athetōn athetei</span>) in the Greek text—keeps up the emphasis of the section.</p></p>
<p id="n4201053"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201053">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The one who sent me</i> refers to God.</p></p>
<p id="n4201054"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201054">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201055"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201055">55</a> <p><b>tc</b> See the <b>tc</b> note on the number “seventy-two” in Luke 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4201056"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201056">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the demons obey”; see L&amp;N 36.18.</p></p>
<p id="n4201057"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201057">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> The prepositional phrase “in your name” indicates the sphere of authority for the messengers’ work of exorcism. </p></p>
<p id="n4201058"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201058">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that Jesus’ reply in vv. 18-20 follows from the positive report of the messengers in v. 17. </p></p>
<p id="n4201059"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201059">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is an imperfect tense verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4201060"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201060">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> In Greek, this is a participle and comes at the end of the verse, making it somewhat emphatic.</p></p>
<p id="n4201061"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201061">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is probably best taken as allusion to Isa 14:12; the phrase in common is <span class="greek">ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">ek tou ouranou</span>). These exorcisms in Jesus’ name are a picture of Satan’s greater defeat at Jesus’ hands (D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> [BECNT], 2:1006-7).</p></p>
<p id="n4201062"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201062">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “trample on” (which emphasizes the impact of the feet on the snakes). See L&amp;N 15.226.</p></p>
<p id="n4201063"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201063">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Snakes and scorpions</i> are examples of the hostility in the creation that is defeated by Jesus. The use of battle imagery shows who the kingdom fights against. See Acts 28:3-6.</p></p>
<p id="n4201064"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201064">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I have given you authority to tread on snakes and scorpions, and [authority] over the full force of the enemy.” The second prepositional phrase can be taken either as modifying the infinitive <span class="greek">πατεῖν</span> (<span class="translit">patein</span>, “to tread”) or the noun <span class="greek">ἐξουσίαν</span> (<span class="translit">exousian</span>, “power”). The former is to be preferred and has been represented in the translation.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>enemy</i> is a reference to Satan (mentioned in v. 18).</p></p>
<p id="n4201065"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201065">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is an emphatic double negative in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n4201066"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201066">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do not rejoice in this, that.” This is awkward in contemporary English and has been simplified to “do not rejoice that.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201067"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201067">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb here is a present imperative, so the call is to an attitude of rejoicing.</p></p>
<p id="n4201068"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201068">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb here, a perfect tense, stresses a present reality of that which was a completed action, that is, their names were etched in the heavenly stone, as it were.</p></p>
<p id="n4201069"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201069">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “In that same hour” (L&amp;N 67.1).</p></p>
<p id="n4201070"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201070">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201071"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201071">71</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Jesus rejoiced</i>. The account of the mission in 10:1-24 ends with several remarks about joy.</p></p>
<p id="n4201072"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201072">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “thank.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201073"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201073">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> The title <i>Lord</i> is an important name for God, showing his sovereignty, but it is interesting that it comes next to a reference to the <i>Father</i>, a term indicative of God’s care. The two concepts are often related in the NT; see Eph 1:3-6. </p></p>
<p id="n4201074"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201074">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “that.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201075"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201075">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> See 1 Cor 1:26-31, where Paul states that not many of the wise, powerful, or privileged had responded to the gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n4201076"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201076">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the childlike,” or “the innocent” (BDAG 671 s.v. <span class="greek">νήπιος</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">β</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4201077"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201077">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for (to do) thus was well pleasing before you,” BDAG 325 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔμπροσθεν</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">δ</span> states: “as a reverential way of expressing oneself, when one is speaking of an eminent pers., and esp. of God, not to connect the subject directly w. what happens, but to say that it took place ‘before someone.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4201078"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201078">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> This verse, frequently referred to as the “bolt from the Johannine blue,” has been noted for its conceptual similarity to statements in John’s Gospel (10:15; 17:2). The authority of the <i>Son</i> and the <i>Father</i> are totally intertwined. The statement here also occurs in Matt 11:27, and serves as a warning against drawing a simplistic dichotomy between Jesus’ teaching in the synoptic gospels and Jesus’ teaching in the Gospel of John.</p></p>
<p id="n4201079"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201079">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “wishes”; or “intends”; or “plans” (cf. BDAG 182 s.v. <span class="greek">βούλομαι</span> 2.b). Here it is the Son who has sovereignty.</p></p>
<p id="n4201080"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201080">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201081"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201081">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201082"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201082">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “turning to the disciples, he said.” The participle <span class="greek">στραφείς</span> (<span class="translit">strapheis</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201083"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201083">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the”; in context the article is used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n4201084"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201084">84</a> <p><b>sn</b> This beatitude highlights the great honor bestowed on the disciples to share in this salvation, as v. 20 also noted. See also Luke 2:30.</p></p>
<p id="n4201085"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201085">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is what past <i>prophets and kings</i> had wanted very much <i>to see</i>, yet the fulfillment had come to the disciples. This remark is like 1 Pet 1:10-12 or Heb 1:1-2.</p></p>
<p id="n4201086"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201086">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic. The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) at the beginning of this statement has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4201087"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201087">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “a lawyer.” This was an expert in the interpretation of the Mosaic law (see also Luke 7:30, where the same term occurs).</p></p>
<p id="n4201088"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201088">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201089"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201089">89</a> <p><b>sn</b> The combination of <i>inherit</i> with <i>eternal life</i> asks, in effect, “What must I do to be saved?”</p></p>
<p id="n4201090"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201090">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “How do you read?” The pronoun “it” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201091"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201091">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he”; the referent (the expert in religious law, shortened here to “the expert”) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201092"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201092">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “You will love.” The future indicative is used here with imperatival force (see <i>ExSyn</i> 452 and 569).</p></p>
<p id="n4201093"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201093">93</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 6:5. The fourfold reference to different parts of the person says, in effect, that one should love God with all one’s being.</p></p>
<p id="n4201094"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201094">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> This portion of the reply is a quotation from Lev 19:18. The verb is repeated in the translation for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4201095"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201095">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201096"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201096">96</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus commends the reply (<i>you have answered correctly</i>). What is assumed here, given the previous context, is that he will respond to Jesus’ message, as to love God is to respond to his Son; see v. 22.</p></p>
<p id="n4201097"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201097">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he”; the referent (the expert in religious law, shortened here to “the expert”) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201098"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201098">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “vindicate.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The expert in religious law picked up on the remark about the neighbor and sought to limit his responsibility for loving. Some believed this obligation would only be required toward the righteous (Sir 12:1-4). The lawyer was trying to see if that was right and thus confidently establish his righteousness (<i>wanting to justify himself</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n4201099"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n4201099">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, said.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified to “replied.”</p></p>
<p id="n42010100"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010100">100</a> <p><b>sn</b> The journey <i>from Jerusalem to Jericho</i> was 17 mi (27 km), descending some 3425 ft (1044 m) in altitude. It was known for its danger because the road ran through areas of desert and caves where the robbers hid.</p></p>
<p id="n42010103"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and beat,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n42010104"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010104">104</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, in a state between life and death; severely wounded.</p></p>
<p id="n42010105"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010105">105</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>by chance</i> adds an initial note of hope and fortune to the expectation in the story.</p></p>
<p id="n42010106"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context between the priest’s expected action (helping the victim) and what he really did.</p></p>
<p id="n42010107"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (the injured man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42010108"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010108">108</a> <p><b>sn</b> It is not said why the priest <i>passed by</i> and refused to help. It is not relevant to the point of the parable that no help was given in the emergency situation.</p></p>
<p id="n42010109"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010109">109</a> <p><b>sn</b> The text suggests that the priest went out of his way (<i>on the other side</i>) not to get too close to the scene.</p></p>
<p id="n42010110"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">κατά</span> (<span class="translit">kata</span>) has been translated “up to”; it could also be translated “upon.”</p></p>
<p id="n42010111"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> The clause containing the aorist active participle <span class="greek">ἐλθών</span> (<span class="translit">elthōn</span>) suggests that the Levite came up to the place, took a look, and then moved on.</p></p>
<p id="n42010112"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context between the previous characters (considered by society to be examples of piety and religious duty) and a hated Samaritan.</p></p>
<p id="n42010113"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is at the beginning of the clause, in emphatic position in the Greek text.</p></p>
<p id="n42010114"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ὁδεύων</span> (<span class="translit">hodeuōn</span>) has been translated as an adjectival participle (cf. NAB, NASB, TEV); it could also be taken temporally (“while he was traveling,” cf. NRSV, NIV).</p></p>
<p id="n42010115"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the injured man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42010116"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Him” is not in the Greek text but is implied. The verb means “to feel compassion for,” and the object of the compassion is understood.</p><p><b>sn</b> Here is what made the Samaritan different: <i>He felt compassion for him</i>. In the story, compassion becomes the concrete expression of love. The next verse details explicitly six acts of compassion.</p></p>
<p id="n42010117"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. Instead, because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n42010118"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to him” are not in the Greek text but are implied. The participle <span class="greek">προσελθών</span> (<span class="translit">proselthōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42010119"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010119">119</a> <p><b>sn</b> The ancient practice of <i>pouring olive oil</i> on wounds was designed to ease pain and provide cleansing for the wounds (Isa 1:6).</p></p>
<p id="n42010120"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative. Because of the length and complexity of this Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n42010121"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> It is not clear whether the causative nuance of the verb included actual assistance or not (“helped him on” versus “had him get on”; see L&amp;N 15.98), but in light of the severity of the man’s condition as described in the preceding verses, some degree of assistance was almost certainly needed.</p></p>
<p id="n42010122"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010122">122</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>His own animal</i> refers to a riding animal, presumably a donkey, but not specified.</p></p>
<p id="n42010123"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42010124"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “two denarii.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>two silver coins</i> were denarii. A denarius was a silver coin worth about a day’s pay for a laborer; this would be an amount worth about two days’ pay.</p></p>
<p id="n42010125"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “when I come back”; the words “this way” are part of an English idiom used to translate the phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n42010126"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010126">126</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus reversed the question the expert in religious law asked in v. 29 to one of becoming a <i>neighbor</i> by loving. “Do not think about who they are, but who you are,” was his reply.</p></p>
<p id="n42010127"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he”; the referent (the expert in religious law) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42010128"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010128">128</a> <p><b>sn</b> The neighbor did not do what was required (that is why his response is called <i>mercy</i>) but had compassion and out of kindness went the extra step that shows love. See Mic 6:8. Note how the expert in religious law could not bring himself to admit that the example was a Samaritan, someone who would have been seen as a racial half-breed and one not worthy of respect. So Jesus makes a second point that neighbors may appear in surprising places.</p></p>
<p id="n42010129"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the concluding summary. </p></p>
<p id="n42010130"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> This recalls the verb of the earlier reply in v. 28.</p></p>
<p id="n42010131"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42010132"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010132">132</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have “into the house” (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>3vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C L <span class="greek">Ξ</span> 33 579) or “into her house” (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> A C<sup>2</sup> D W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 070 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat) at the end of the sentence. But the English translation masks the multitude of variants: Different forms of “house” (<span class="greek">οἰκίαν</span> [<span class="translit">oikian</span>], <span class="greek">οἶκον</span> [<span class="translit">oikon</span>]) and “her” occur (see <i>TCGNT</i> 129). These variations argue against authenticity; they no doubt arose because of the abrupt ending of the sentence (the Greek is more literally translated simply as “Martha received him”), prompting copyists to add the location. The shorter reading is found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45,75</sup> B sa. </p><p><b>tn</b> For the meaning “to welcome, to have as a guest” see L&amp;N 34.53.</p></p>
<p id="n42010133"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42010134"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> This reflexive makes it clear that Mary took the initiative in sitting by Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n42010135"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010135">135</a> <p><b>sn</b> The description of Mary sitting <i>at the Lord’s feet</i> and listening to him makes her sound like a disciple (compare Luke 8:35).</p></p>
<p id="n42010136"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010136">136</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>distracted</i> means “to be pulled away” by something (L&amp;N 25.238). It is a narrative comment that makes clear who is right in the account.</p></p>
<p id="n42010137"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with much serving.”</p></p>
<p id="n42010138"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that the following was a result of Martha’s distraction.</p></p>
<p id="n42010139"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010139">139</a> <p><b>tn</b> The negative <span class="greek">οὐ</span> (<span class="translit">ou</span>) used with the verb expects a positive reply. Martha expected Jesus to respond and rebuke Mary.</p></p>
<p id="n42010140"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has left me to serve alone.”</p></p>
<p id="n42010141"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010141">141</a> <p><b>tn</b> The conjunction <span class="greek">οὖν</span> (<span class="translit">oun</span>, “then, therefore”) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n42010142"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010142">142</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A B* C D W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> it) read “Jesus” instead of “the Lord” here, but <span class="greek">κύριος</span> (<span class="translit">kurios</span>, “Lord”) has the support of some weighty papyri, majuscules, and other witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>3,[45],75</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B<sup>2</sup> L 579 892 lat sa). </p></p>
<p id="n42010143"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010143">143</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, said to her.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified to “answered her.”</p></p>
<p id="n42010144"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010144">144</a> <p><b>sn</b> The double vocative <i>Martha, Martha</i> communicates emotion.</p></p>
<p id="n42010145"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010145">145</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “upset.” Here the meanings of <span class="greek">μεριμνάω</span> (<span class="translit">merimnaō</span>) and <span class="greek">θορυβάζομαι</span> (<span class="translit">thorubazomai</span>) reinforce each other (L&amp;N 25.234).</p></p>
<p id="n42010146"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010146">146</a> <p><b>tc</b> Or, with some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>3</sup> [<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>] B C<sup>2</sup> L 070<sup>vid</sup> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 [579]), “few things are needed—or only one” (as well as other variants). The textual problem here is a difficult one to decide. The shorter reading is normally preferred, but it is not altogether clear how the variants would arise from it. However, the reading followed in the translation has good support (with some internal variations) from a number of witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45,75</sup> A C* W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sa).</p></p>
<p id="n42010147"><a href="file1025.xhtml#n42010147">147</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “better”; <i>Grk</i> “good.” This is an instance of the positive adjective used in place of the superlative adjective. According to <i>ExSyn</i> 298, this could also be treated as a positive for comparative (“better”).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
