<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Thessalonians 4</h2>
<p id="n520041"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n520041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n520042"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n520042">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>As you received instruction from us about how</i> (<i>Grk</i> “as you received from us how”). The Greek word translated <i>received</i> is used for accepting instructions passed on as fixed traditions from teacher to follower. Paul speaks in these terms about doctrinal traditions as well as ethical instruction that he passes on to his converts and expects them to keep (cf. 1 Cor 11:2, 23; 15:1-3; Gal 1:9; Phil 4:9; 2 Thess 2:15; 3:6).</p></p>
<p id="n520043"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n520043">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> This parenthetical clause is absent in several later witnesses (D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 2464<sup>vid</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i>), but it may have been expunged for sounding redundant. The longer text, in this instance, is solidly supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B D* F G 0183<sup>vid</sup> 0278 33 81 104 326 365 629 <i>al</i> co and should be unquestionably preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n520044"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n520044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “your sanctification.”</p></p>
<p id="n520045"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n520045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to gain [or possess] his own vessel.” “Vessel” is most likely used figuratively for “body” (cf. 2 Cor 4:7). Some take it to mean “wife” (thus, “to take a wife for himself” or “to live with his wife”), but this is less likely. See J. Smith, “1 Thess 4:4—Breaking the Impasse,” <i>BBR</i> 10 (Fall 2000), who argues that “vessel” in this context is very likely a euphemism for the sexual organs.</p></p>
<p id="n520046"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n520046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not to transgress against or defraud his brother in the matter,” continuing the sentence of vv. 3-5.</p></p>
<p id="n520047"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n520047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “concerning all these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n520048"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n520048">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “rejecting man.”</p></p>
<p id="n520049"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n520049">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “concerning brotherly love.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200410"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers”; this applies to the second occurrence as well. See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5200411"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200411">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To do so more and more</i>. See a similar phrase in 1 Thess 4:1.</p></p>
<p id="n5200412"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that you may live,” continuing the sentence of 4:10b-11.</p></p>
<p id="n5200413"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “not be dependent on anyone”; <i>Grk</i> “and have need of nothing,” “of no one.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200414"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ignorant.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200415"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:4.</p></p>
<p id="n5200416"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200416">16</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses have the perfect participle <span class="greek">κεκοιμημένων</span> here (“who have fallen asleep” [D (F G) <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1241 1505 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i>]), but the present participle <span class="greek">κοιμωμένων</span> (“who are asleep”) is better supported by early and significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B 0278 33 81 1175 1739 <i>al</i>) and should be considered the <i>Ausgangstext</i>.</p> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">κοιμάω</span> (<span class="translit">koimaō</span>) literally means “sleep,” but it is often used in the Bible as a euphemism for death when speaking of believers. This metaphorical usage by its very nature emphasizes the hope of resurrection: Believers will one day “wake up” out of death. Here the term refers to death, but “sleep” was used in the translation to emphasize the metaphorical, rhetorical usage of the term. This word also occurs in vv. 14 and 15. </p></p>
<p id="n5200417"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> “we believe that” is understood from the first clause of the verse, which is parallel. <i>Grk</i> “so also God will bring.”</p></p>
<p id="n5200418"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those who have fallen asleep through Jesus.” It is possible that “through Jesus” describes “bring,” but this gives the unlikely double reference, “through Jesus God will bring them with Jesus.” Instead it describes their “falling sleep,” since through him their death is only sleep and not the threat it once was. Also Christians are those whose total existence—life and death—is in and through and for Christ (1 Cor 8:6).</p></p>
<p id="n5200419"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200419">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The word of the Lord</i> is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; Luke 22:61, Acts 11:16, 1 Pet 1:25) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; here and in Acts 8:25; 13:44, 48, 49; 15:35, 36; 16:32; 19:10, 20; 1 Thess 1:8; 2 Thess 3:1). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said.</p></p>
<p id="n5200420"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Neither noun in this phrase (<span class="greek">ἐν φωνῇ ἀρχαγγέλου</span>, <span class="translit">en phōnē archangelou</span>, “with the voice of the archangel”) has the article in keeping with Apollonius’ Canon. Since <span class="greek">ἀρχάγγελος</span> (<span class="translit">archangelos</span>) is most likely par excellence, both nouns are translated as definite in keeping with Apollonius’ Corollary (see <i>ExSyn</i> 250-51).</p></p>
<p id="n5200421"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200421">21</a> <p><b>tc</b> The words <span class="greek">οἱ περιλειπόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">hoi perileipomenoi</span>, “[the ones] who are left”) are lacking in F G 0226<sup>vid</sup> ar b as well as a few fathers, but the rest of the textual tradition has the words. Most likely, the Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> omitted the words because of perceived redundancy with <span class="greek">οἱ ζῶντες</span> (<span class="translit">hoi zōntes</span>, “[the ones] who are alive”).</p></p>
<p id="n5200422"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “snatched up.” The Greek verb <span class="greek">ἁρπάζω</span> implies that the action is quick or forceful, so the translation supplied the adverb “suddenly” to make this implicit notion clear.</p></p>
<p id="n5200423"><a href="file1167.xhtml#n5200423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “simultaneously,” but this meaning does not fit as well in the parallel in 5:10.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
