<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Corinthians 11</h2>
<p id="n470111"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n470111">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, to Christ.</p></p>
<p id="n470112"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n470112">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “chaste.”</p></p>
<p id="n470113"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n470113">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I fear lest somehow.”</p></p>
<p id="n470114"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n470114">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the snake.”</p></p>
<p id="n470115"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n470115">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “craftiness.”</p></p>
<p id="n470116"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n470116">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “corrupted,” “seduced.”</p></p>
<p id="n470117"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n470117">7</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> H <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0121 0243 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) lack “and pure” (<span class="greek">καὶ τῆς ἁγνότητος</span>, <span class="translit">kai tēs hagnotētos</span>; <i>Grk</i> “and purity”) several significant and early witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B D<sup>[2]</sup> F G 33 81 104 ar r co) retain these words. Their presence in such <span class="smcaps">mss</span> across such a wide geographical distribution argues for their authenticity. The omission from the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> can be explained by haplography, since the <span class="greek">-τητος</span> ending of <span class="greek">ἁγνότητος</span> is identical to the ending of <span class="greek">ἁπλότητος</span> (<span class="translit">haplotētos</span>, “sincerity”) three words back (<span class="greek">ἁπλό<b>τητος</b> καὶ τῆς ἁγνό<b>τητος</b></span>); further, since the meanings of “sincerity” and “purity” are similar they might seem redundant. A copyist would scarcely notice the omission because Paul’s statement still makes sense without “and from purity.”</p></p>
<p id="n470118"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n470118">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “preaches.”</p></p>
<p id="n470119"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n470119">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “another Jesus whom we have not proclaimed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701110"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a different spirit which you did not receive.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701111"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a different gospel which you did not accept.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701112"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you endure it very well.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701113"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The implicit irony in Paul’s remark is brought out well by the TEV “I do not think that I am the least bit inferior to those very special so-called ‘apostles’ of yours!”</p><p><b>sn</b> The ‘<i>super-apostles</i>’ refers either (1) to the original apostles (the older interpretation) or (2) more probably, to Paul’s opponents in Corinth, in which case the designation is ironic.</p></p>
<p id="n4701114"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701114">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Unskilled in speaking</i> means not professionally trained as a rhetorician.</p></p>
<p id="n4701115"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701115">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul is referring to <i>humbling</i> himself to the point of doing manual labor to support himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4701116"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “preached.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701117"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701117">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, <i>serve</i> them free of charge (cf. the end of v. 7).</p></p>
<p id="n4701118"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you, and when.” A new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4701119"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> If the participle <span class="greek">ἐλθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">elthontes</span>) is taken as temporal rather than adjectival, the translation would be, “for the brothers, when they came from Macedonia, fully supplied my needs” (similar to NASB).</p></p>
<p id="n4701120"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “needs, and I kept.” A new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4701121"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, that Paul offers the gospel free of charge to the Corinthians (see 2 Cor 11:7).</p></p>
<p id="n4701122"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “silenced.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701123"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God knows!” The words “I do” are supplied for clarity. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4701124"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “an opportunity, so that they may be found just like us.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701125"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dishonest.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701126"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “workers, masquerading.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701127"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Satan himself masquerades.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701128"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “also masquerade.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701129"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “their works.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701130"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “am foolish.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701131"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with this confidence of boasting.” The genitive <span class="greek">καυχήσεως</span> (<span class="translit">kauchēseōs</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive (the noun in the genitive functions as an adjective of the noun modified).</p></p>
<p id="n4701132"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701132">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “say with the Lord’s authority.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701133"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701133">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Many</i> is a reference to Paul’s opponents.</p></p>
<p id="n4701134"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “according to the flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701135"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you tolerate.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701136"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you tolerate.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701137"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> See L&amp;N 88.212.</p></p>
<p id="n4701138"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “my shame.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701139"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701139">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> It seems best, in context, to see the statement <i>we were too weak for that</i> as a parenthetical and ironic comment by Paul on his physical condition (weakness or sickness) while he was with the Corinthians (cf. 2 Cor 12:7-10; Gal 4:15).</p></p>
<p id="n4701140"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to boast about” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, and this phrase serves as the direct object of the preceding verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4701141"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I also dare”; the words “to boast about the same thing” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, and this phrase serves as the direct object of the preceding verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4701142"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “forty less one”; this was a standard sentence. “Lashes” is supplied to clarify for the modern reader what is meant.</p></p>
<p id="n4701143"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701143">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Beaten with a rod</i> refers to the Roman punishment of <i>admonitio</i> according to BDAG 902 s.v. <span class="greek">ῥαβδίζω</span>. Acts 16:22 describes one of these occasions in Philippi; in this case it was administered by the city magistrates, who had wide powers in a military colony.</p></p>
<p id="n4701144"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701144">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Received a stoning</i>. See Acts 14:19, where this incident is described.</p></p>
<p id="n4701145"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bandits.” The word normally refers more to highwaymen (“robbers”) but can also refer to insurrectionists or revolutionaries (“bandits”).</p></p>
<p id="n4701146"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701147"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The two different words for labor are translated “in hard work and toil” by L&amp;N 42.48.</p></p>
<p id="n4701148"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701148">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in cold and nakedness.” Paul does not mean complete nakedness, however, which would have been repugnant to a Jew; he refers instead to the lack of sufficient clothing, especially in cold weather. A related word is used to 1 Cor 4:11, also in combination with experiencing hunger and thirst.</p></p>
<p id="n4701149"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701149">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Apart from other things</i>. Paul refers here either (1) to the external sufferings just mentioned, or (2) he refers to other things he has left unmentioned.</p></p>
<p id="n4701150"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Anxious concern,” so translated in L&amp;N 25.224.</p></p>
<p id="n4701151"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701151">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who is caused to stumble.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701152"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701152">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “If boasting is necessary.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701153"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701153">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “about the things related to my weakness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701154"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701154">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ethnarch.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>governor</i> was an official called an “ethnarch” who was appointed to rule on behalf of a king over a certain region.</p></p>
<p id="n4701155"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701155">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the city of the Damascenes.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701156"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701156">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to seize,” “to catch.”</p></p>
<p id="n4701157"><a href="file1136.xhtml#n4701157">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> In Acts 9:25 the same basket used in Paul’s escape is called a <span class="greek">σπυρίς</span> (<span class="translit">spuris</span>), a basket larger than a <span class="greek">κόφινος</span> (<span class="translit">kophinos</span>). It was very likely made out of rope, so the translation “rope-basket” is used.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
