<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Mark 15</h2>
<p id="n410151"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n410151">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22.</p></p>
<p id="n410152"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n410152">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Jews most assuredly wanted to put Jesus to death, but they lacked the authority to do so. For this reason they <i>handed him over to Pilate</i> in hopes of securing a death sentence. The Romans kept close control of the death penalty in conquered territories to prevent it being used to execute Roman sympathizers.</p></p>
<p id="n410153"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n410153">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410154"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n410154">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>Are you the king of the Jews?</i>” Pilate was interested in this charge because of its political implications of sedition against Rome.</p></p>
<p id="n410155"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n410155">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, he said to him.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> (<span class="translit">apokritheis</span>) is redundant, but the syntax of the phrase has been modified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n410156"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n410156">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> The reply “<i>You say so</i>” is somewhat enigmatic, like Jesus’ earlier reply to the Jewish leadership (mentioned in Matt 26:64 and Luke 22:70).</p></p>
<p id="n410157"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n410157">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410158"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n410158">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Pilate asked him again, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n410159"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n410159">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “them”; the referent (the people) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> The custom of Pilate <i>to release one prisoner to them</i> is unknown outside the gospels in Jewish writings, but it was a Roman custom at the time and thus probably used in Palestine as well (cf. Matt 27:15; John 18:39); see W. W. Wessel, “Mark,” <i>EBC</i> 8:773-74.</p></p>
<p id="n4101510"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Coming up the crowd began to ask [him to do] as he was doing for them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101511"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Pilate answered them, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4101512"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101512">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4101513"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to have him release for them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101514"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, Pilate spoke to them again.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> (<span class="translit">apokritheis</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4101515"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101515">15</a> <p><b>tc</b> Instead of “what do you want me to do” several witnesses, including the most significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 892), lack <span class="greek">θέλετε</span> (<span class="translit">thelete</span>, “you want”), turning the question into the more abrupt “what should I do?” Although the witnesses for the longer reading are not as significant (A D <span class="greek">Θ</span> 0250 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy), the reading without <span class="greek">θέλετε</span> conforms to Matt 27:22 and thus is suspected of being a scribal emendation. The known scribal tendency to assimilate one synoptic passage to another parallel, coupled with the lack of such assimilation in <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that are otherwise known to do this most frequently (the Western and Byzantine texts), suggests that <span class="greek">θέλετε</span> is authentic. Further, Mark’s known style of being generally more verbose and redundant than Matthew’s argues that <span class="greek">θέλετε</span> is authentic here. That this is the longer reading, however, and that a good variety of witnesses omit the word, gives one pause. Perhaps the wording without <span class="greek">θέλετε</span> would have been perceived as having greater homiletical value, motivating scribes to move in this direction. A decision is difficult, but on the whole internal evidence leads toward regarding <span class="greek">θέλετε</span> as authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n4101516"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101516">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> Crucifixion was the cruelest form of punishment practiced by the Romans. Roman citizens could not normally undergo it. It was reserved for the worst crimes, like treason and evasion of due process in a capital case. The Roman historian Cicero called it “a cruel and disgusting penalty” (<i>Against Verres</i> 2.5.63-66 §§163-70); Josephus (<i>J. W</i>. 7.6.4 [7.203]) called it the worst of deaths.</p></p>
<p id="n4101517"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101518"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">φραγελλόω</span> (<span class="translit">phragelloō</span>) refers to flogging. BDAG 1064 s.v. states, “<i>flog, scourge,</i> a punishment inflicted on slaves and provincials after a sentence of death had been pronounced on them. So in the case of Jesus before the crucifixion…Mt 27:26; Mk 15:15.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A Roman flogging (traditionally, “scourging”) was an excruciating punishment. The victim was stripped of his clothes and bound to a post with his hands fastened above him (or sometimes he was thrown to the ground). Guards standing on either side of the victim would incessantly beat him with a whip (<i>flagellum</i>) made out of leather with pieces of lead and bone inserted into its ends. While the Jews only allowed 39 lashes, the Romans had no such limit; many people who received such a beating died as a result. See C. Schneider, <i>TDNT</i>, 4:515-19. </p></p>
<p id="n4101519"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “delivered him up.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101520"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “So” to indicate that the soldiers’ action is in response to Pilate’s condemnation of the prisoner in v. 15. </p></p>
<p id="n4101521"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “(that is, the praetorium).” </p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>governor’s residence</i> (<i>Grk</i> “praetorium”) was the Roman governor’s official residence. The one in Jerusalem may have been Herod’s palace in the western part of the city, or the fortress Antonia northwest of the temple area.</p></p>
<p id="n4101522"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101522">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> A Roman <i>cohort</i> was a tenth of a legion, about 500-600 soldiers.</p></p>
<p id="n4101523"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101523">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>purple cloak</i> probably refers to a military garment which had the color of royal <i>purple</i>, and thus resembled a king’s robe. The soldiers did this to Jesus as a form of mockery in view of the charges that he was a king (cf. 15:2).</p></p>
<p id="n4101524"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “weaving.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101525"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101525">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>crown</i> may have been made from palm spines or some other thorny plant common in Israel. In placing the crown of <i>thorns</i> on his head, the soldiers were unwittingly symbolizing God’s curse on humanity (cf. Gen 3:18) being placed on Jesus. Their purpose would have been to mock Jesus’ claim to be a king; the crown of thorns would have represented the “radiant corona” portrayed on the heads of rulers on coins and other artifacts in the 1st century.</p></p>
<p id="n4101526"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Long live the King of the Jews!”</p><p><b>sn</b> The statement <i>Hail, King of the Jews!</i> is a mockery patterned after the Romans’ cry of <i>Ave, Caesar</i> (“Hail, Caesar!”).</p></p>
<p id="n4101527"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb here has been translated as an iterative imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4101528"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a reed.” The Greek term can mean either “staff” or “reed.” See BDAG 502 s.v. <span class="greek">κάλαμος</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4101529"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The aorist tense is taken consummatively here.</p></p>
<p id="n4101530"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101531"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101531">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Crucify</i> in 15:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4101532"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They”; the referent (the soldiers) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101533"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “conscripted”; or “pressed into service.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101534"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101534">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus was beaten severely with a whip before this (the prelude to crucifixion, known to the Romans as <i>verberatio</i>, mentioned in Matt 27:26; Mark 15:15; John 19:1), so he would have been weak from trauma and loss of blood. Apparently he was unable to bear the cross himself, so <i>Simon</i> was conscripted to help (in all probability this was only the crossbeam, called in Latin the <i>patibulum</i>, since the upright beam usually remained in the ground at the place of execution). <i>Cyrene</i> was located in North Africa where Tripoli is today. Nothing more is known about this Simon.</p></p>
<p id="n4101535"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “was coming in from his field” outside the city (BDAG 15-16 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀγρός</span> 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4101536"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101536">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him.” </p></p>
<p id="n4101537"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a place, Golgotha.” This is an Aramaic name; see John 19:17.</p></p>
<p id="n4101538"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101538">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The place called Golgotha (which is translated “Place of the Skull”)</i>. This location is north and just outside of Jerusalem. The hill on which it is located protruded much like a skull, giving the place its name. The Latin word for the Greek term <span class="greek">κρανίον</span> (<span class="translit">kranion</span>) is <i>calvaria</i>, from which the English word “Calvary” is derived (cf. Luke 23:33 in the KJV).</p></p>
<p id="n4101539"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101539">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> It is difficult to say for certain who gave Jesus this drink of <i>wine mixed with myrrh</i> (e.g., the executioner, or perhaps women from Jerusalem). In any case, whoever gave it to him most likely did so in order to relieve his pain, but Jesus was unwilling to take it.</p></p>
<p id="n4101540"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101540">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101541"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101541">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Crucify</i> in 15:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4101542"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101542">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by throwing the lot” (probably by using marked pebbles or broken pieces of pottery). A modern equivalent, “throwing dice,” was chosen here because of its association with gambling. According to L&amp;N 6.219 a term for “dice” is particularly appropriate.</p><p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Ps 22:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4101543"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It was the third hour.” This time would have been approximate, and could refer to the beginning of the process, some time before Jesus was lifted on the cross.</p></p>
<p id="n4101544"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101544">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> Mention of the <i>inscription</i> is an important detail, because the inscription would normally give the reason for the execution. It shows that Jesus was executed for claiming to be a king. It was also probably written with irony from the executioners’ point of view.</p></p>
<p id="n4101545"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101545">45</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> add <b>15:28</b> “And the scripture was fulfilled that says, ‘He was counted with the lawless ones.’” Verse 28 is included in L <span class="greek">Θ</span> 083 0250 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat, but is lacking in significant Alexandrian and Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> and some others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C D <span class="greek">Ψ</span>). The addition of the verse with its quotation from Isa 53:12 probably represents a scribal assimilation from Luke 22:37. It was almost certainly not an original part of Mark’s Gospel. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n4101546"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101546">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is rich irony in the statement of those who were passing by, “<i>Save yourself and come down from the cross!</i>” In summary, they wanted Jesus to come down from the cross and save his physical life, but it was indeed his staying on the cross and giving his physical life that led to the fact that they could experience a resurrection from death to life. There is a similar kind of irony in the statement made by the chief priests and experts in the law in 15:31. </p></p>
<p id="n4101547"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101547">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22. Only “chief priests” is in the nominative case; this sentence structure attempts to capture this emphasis.</p></p>
<p id="n4101548"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101548">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Mocking him, the chief priests…said among themselves.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101549"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101549">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 8:29.</p></p>
<p id="n4101550"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101550">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> Mark’s wording suggests that both of the criminals <i>spoke abusively to him</i>. If so, one of them quickly changed his attitude toward Jesus (see Luke 23:40-43).</p></p>
<p id="n4101551"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101551">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4101552"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101552">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “When the sixth hour had come.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101553"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101553">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> This imagery has parallels to the Day of the Lord: Joel 2:10; Amos 8:9; Zeph 1:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4101554"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101554">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “until the ninth hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101555"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101555">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> The repetition of the phrase “three o’clock” preserves the author’s rougher, less elegant style (cf. Matt 27:45-46; Luke 23:44). Although such stylistic matters are frequently handled differently in the translation, because the issue of synoptic literary dependence is involved here, it was considered important to reflect some of the stylistic differences among the synoptics in the translation, so that the English reader can be aware of them.</p></p>
<p id="n4101556"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101556">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 22:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4101557"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101557">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> Perhaps the crowd thought Jesus was <i>calling for Elijah</i> because the exclamation “my God, my God” (i.e., in Aramaic, <i>Eloi</i>, <i>Eloi</i>) sounds like the name Elijah.</p></p>
<p id="n4101558"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101558">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Sour wine</i> refers to cheap wine that was called in Latin <i>posca</i>, a cheap vinegar wine diluted heavily with water. It was the drink of slaves and soldiers, and was probably there for the soldiers who had performed the crucifixion.</p></p>
<p id="n4101559"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101559">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a reed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101560"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101560">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> The referent of this term, <span class="greek">καταπέτασμα</span> (<span class="translit">katapetasma</span>), is not entirely clear. It could refer to the curtain separating the holy of holies from the holy place (Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 5.5.5 [5.219]), or it could refer to one at the entrance of the temple court (Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 5.5.4 [5.212]). Many argue that the inner curtain is meant because another term, <span class="greek">κάλυμμα</span> (<span class="translit">kalumma</span>), is also used for the outer curtain. Others see a reference to the outer curtain as more likely because of the public nature of this sign. Either way, the symbolism means that access to God has been opened up. It also pictures a judgment that includes the sacrifices.</p></p>
<p id="n4101561"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101561">61</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>centurion</i> was a noncommissioned officer in the Roman army or one of the auxiliary territorial armies, commanding a <i>centuria</i> of (nominally) 100 men. The responsibilities of centurions were broadly similar to modern junior officers, but there was a wide gap in social status between them and officers, and relatively few were promoted beyond the rank of senior centurion. The Roman troops stationed in Judea were auxiliaries, who would normally be rewarded with Roman citizenship after 25 years of service. Some of the centurions throughout the region may have served originally in the Roman legions (regular army) and thus gained their citizenship at enlistment. Others may have inherited it, like the apostle Paul did (cf. Acts 22:28).</p></p>
<p id="n4101562"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101562">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the way he breathed his last”; or “the way he expired”; or “that he thus breathed no more.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101563"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101563">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> In Matt 27:56 the name <i>Joses</i> is written as <i>Joseph</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4101564"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101564">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and ministered to him.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Cf. Luke 8:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4101566"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101566">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic and introduction of a new character.</p></p>
<p id="n4101567"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101567">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The day of preparation</i> was the day before the Sabbath when everything had to be prepared for it, as no work could be done on the Sabbath.</p></p>
<p id="n4101568"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101568">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a councillor” (as a member of the Sanhedrin, see L&amp;N 11.85). This indicates that some individuals among the leaders did respond to Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4101569"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101569">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “waiting for.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Though some dispute that Joseph of Arimathea was a disciple of Jesus, this remark that he was <i>looking forward to the kingdom of God</i> and his actions regarding Jesus’ burial suggest otherwise.</p></p>
<p id="n4101570"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101570">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4101571"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101571">71</a> <p><b>sn</b> Asking <i>for the body of Jesus</i> was indeed a bold move on the part of Joseph of Arimathea, for it clearly and openly identified him with a man who had just been condemned and executed, namely, Jesus. His faith is exemplary, especially for someone who was a member of the council that handed Jesus over for crucifixion (cf. Luke 23:51). He did this because he sought to give Jesus an honorable burial.</p></p>
<p id="n4101572"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101572">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4101573"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101573">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 15:39.</p></p>
<p id="n4101574"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101574">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Pilate) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101575"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101575">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Joseph of Arimathea) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101576"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101576">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">σινδών</span> (<span class="translit">sindōn</span>) can refer to a linen cloth used either for clothing or for burial.</p></p>
<p id="n4101577"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101577">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, cut or carved into an outcropping of natural rock, resulting in a cave-like structure (see L&amp;N 19.25).</p></p>
<p id="n4101578"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101578">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101579"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101579">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the door,” “against the door.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101580"><a href="file1013.xhtml#n4101580">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it”; the referent (Jesus’ body) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
