<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Galatians 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Galatians<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Now I mean that the heir, as long as he is a minor,<sup><a id="n480041" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n480041">1</a></sup> is no different from a slave, though he is the owner<sup><a id="n480042" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n480042">2</a></sup> of everything. <span class="verse">4:2</span> But he is under guardians<sup><a id="n480043" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n480043">3</a></sup> and managers until the date set by his<sup><a id="n480044" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n480044">4</a></sup> father. <span class="verse">4:3</span> So also we, when we were minors,<sup><a id="n480045" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n480045">5</a></sup> were enslaved under the basic forces<sup><a id="n480046" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n480046">6</a></sup> of the world. <span class="verse">4:4</span> But when the appropriate time<sup><a id="n480047" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n480047">7</a></sup> had come, God sent out his Son, born of a woman, born under the law, <span class="verse">4:5</span> to redeem those who were under the law, so that we may be adopted as sons with full rights.<sup><a id="n480048" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n480048">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:6</span> And because you are sons, God sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, who calls<sup><a id="n480049" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n480049">9</a></sup> “<i>Abba!</i><sup><a id="n4800410" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800410">10</a></sup> Father!” <span class="verse">4:7</span> So you are no longer a slave but a son, and if you are<sup><a id="n4800411" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800411">11</a></sup> a son, then you are also an heir through God.<sup><a id="n4800412" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800412">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Heirs of Promise Are Not to Return to Law</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:8</span> Formerly when you did not know God, you were enslaved to beings that by nature are not gods at all.<sup><a id="n4800413" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800413">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:9</span> But now that you have come to know God (or rather to be known by God), how can you turn back again to the weak and worthless<sup><a id="n4800414" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800414">14</a></sup> basic forces?<sup><a id="n4800415" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800415">15</a></sup> Do you want to be enslaved to them all over again?<sup><a id="n4800416" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800416">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:10</span> You are observing religious<sup><a id="n4800417" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800417">17</a></sup> days and months and seasons and years. <span class="verse">4:11</span> I fear for you that my work for you may have been in vain. <span class="verse">4:12</span> I beg you, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n4800418" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800418">18</a></sup> become like me, because I have become like you. You have done me no wrong! </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Personal Appeal of Paul</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:13</span> But you know it was because of a physical illness that I first proclaimed the gospel to you, <span class="verse">4:14</span> and though my physical condition put you to the test, you did not despise or reject me.<sup><a id="n4800419" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800419">19</a></sup> Instead, you welcomed me as though I were an angel of God,<sup><a id="n4800420" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800420">20</a></sup> as though I were Christ Jesus himself!<sup><a id="n4800421" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800421">21</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:15</span> Where then is your sense of happiness<sup><a id="n4800422" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800422">22</a></sup> now? For I testify about you that if it were possible, you would have pulled out your eyes and given them to me! <span class="verse">4:16</span> So then, have I become your enemy by telling you the truth?<sup><a id="n4800423" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800423">23</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:17</span> They court you eagerly,<sup><a id="n4800424" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800424">24</a></sup> but for no good purpose;<sup><a id="n4800425" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800425">25</a></sup> they want to exclude you, so that you would seek them eagerly.<sup><a id="n4800426" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800426">26</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:18</span> However, it is good<sup><a id="n4800427" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800427">27</a></sup> to be sought eagerly<sup><a id="n4800428" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800428">28</a></sup> for a good purpose<sup><a id="n4800429" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800429">29</a></sup> at all times, and not only when I am present with you. <span class="verse">4:19</span> My children—I am again undergoing birth pains until Christ is formed in you!<sup><a id="n4800430" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800430">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:20</span> I wish I could be with you now and change my tone of voice,<sup><a id="n4800431" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800431">31</a></sup> because I am perplexed about you. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">An Appeal from Allegory</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:21</span> Tell me, you who want to be under the law, do you not understand the law?<sup><a id="n4800432" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800432">32</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:22</span> For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the<sup><a id="n4800433" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800433">33</a></sup> slave woman and the other by the free woman. <span class="verse">4:23</span> But one, the son by the slave woman, was born by natural descent,<sup><a id="n4800434" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800434">34</a></sup> while the other, the son by the free woman, was born through the promise. <span class="verse">4:24</span> These things may be treated as an allegory,<sup><a id="n4800435" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800435">35</a></sup> for these women represent two covenants. One is from Mount Sinai bearing children for slavery; this is Hagar. <span class="verse">4:25</span> Now Hagar represents Mount Sinai in Arabia and corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for she is in slavery with her children. <span class="verse">4:26</span> But the Jerusalem above is free,<sup><a id="n4800436" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800436">36</a></sup> and she is our mother. <span class="verse">4:27</span> For it is written:</p>
<p class="poetry">“<b><i>Rejoice, O barren woman who does not bear children;</i></b><sup><a id="n4800437" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800437">37</a></sup> </p>
<p class="poetry"><b><i>break forth and shout, you who have no birth pains,</i></b></p>
<p class="poetry"><b><i>because the children of the desolate woman are more numerous</i></b></p>
<p class="poetry"><b><i>than those of the woman who has a husband</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n4800438" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800438">38</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:28</span> But you,<sup><a id="n4800439" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800439">39</a></sup> brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n4800440" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800440">40</a></sup> are children of the promise like Isaac. <span class="verse">4:29</span> But just as at that time the one born by natural descent<sup><a id="n4800441" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800441">41</a></sup> persecuted the one born according to the Spirit,<sup><a id="n4800442" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800442">42</a></sup> so it is now. <span class="verse">4:30</span> But what does the scripture say? “<i><b>Throw out the slave woman and her son, for the son of the slave woman will not share the inheritance with the son</b></i>”<sup><a id="n4800443" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800443">43</a></sup> of the free woman. <span class="verse">4:31</span> Therefore, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n4800444" href="file1143_notes.xhtml#n4800444">44</a></sup> we are not children of the slave woman but of the free woman. </p>

</body>
</html>