<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Hebrews 4</h2>
<p id="n580041"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n580041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let us fear.”</p></p>
<p id="n580042"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n580042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “they were not united.”</p></p>
<p id="n580043"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n580043">3</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> and a few versional witnesses) have the nominative singular participle <span class="greek">συγκεκερασμένος</span> (<span class="translit">sunkekerasmenos</span>, “since it [the message] was not combined with faith by those who heard it”), a reading that refers back to the <span class="greek">ὁ λόγος</span> (<span class="translit">ho logos</span>, “the message”). There are a few other variants here (e.g., <span class="greek">συγκεκεραμμένοι</span> [<span class="translit">sunkekerammenoi</span>] in 104, <span class="greek">συγκεκεραμένους</span> [<span class="translit">sunkekeramenous</span>] in 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span>), but the accusative plural participle <span class="greek">συγκεκερασμένους</span> (<span class="translit">sunkekerasmenous</span>), found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>13vid,46</sup> A B C D* <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0243 0278 33 81 1739 2464, has by far the best external credentials. This participle agrees with the previous <span class="greek">ἐκείνους</span> (<span class="translit">ekeinous</span>, “those”), a more difficult construction grammatically than the nominative singular. Thus, both on external and internal grounds, <span class="greek">συγκεκερασμένους</span> is preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n580044"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n580044">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 95:11.</p></p>
<p id="n580045"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n580045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “although the works,” continuing the previous reference to God. The referent (God) is specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n580046"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n580046">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 2:2.</p></p>
<p id="n580047"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n580047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and in this again.”</p></p>
<p id="n580048"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n580048">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n580049"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n580049">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> Ps 95 in the Hebrew does not mention David either in the text or the superscription. The writer of Hebrews might attribute Psalms as a whole to David, though some psalms are specifically attributed to other individuals or groups. Yet the Greek inscription for Ps 95 in the LXX credits the psalm to David, and the author of Hebrews frequently uses the LXX.</p></p>
<p id="n5800410"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n5800410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as it has been said before” (see Heb 3:7).</p></p>
<p id="n5800411"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n5800411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “today if you hear his voice.”</p></p>
<p id="n5800412"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n5800412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5800413"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n5800413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5800414"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n5800414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5800415"><a href="file1195.xhtml#n5800415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for timely help.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
