<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Mark 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Following Jesus </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:34</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100851" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100851">51</a></sup> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100852" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100852">52</a></sup> called the crowd, along with his disciples, and said to them, “If anyone wants to become my follower,<sup><a id="n4100853" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100853">53</a></sup> he must deny<sup><a id="n4100854" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100854">54</a></sup> himself, take up his cross,<sup><a id="n4100855" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100855">55</a></sup> and follow me. <span class="verse">8:35</span> For whoever wants to save his life<sup><a id="n4100856" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100856">56</a></sup> will lose it,<sup><a id="n4100857" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100857">57</a></sup> but whoever loses his life because of me and because of the gospel<sup><a id="n4100858" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100858">58</a></sup> will save it. <span class="verse">8:36</span> For what benefit is it for a person<sup><a id="n4100859" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100859">59</a></sup> to gain the whole world, yet<sup><a id="n4100860" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100860">60</a></sup> forfeit his life? <span class="verse">8:37</span> What can a person give in exchange for his life? <span class="verse">8:38</span> For if anyone is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man will also be ashamed of him<sup><a id="n4100861" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100861">61</a></sup> when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.” <span class="verse">9:1</span> And he said to them, “I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n410091" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n410091">1</a></sup> there are some standing here who will not<sup><a id="n410092" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n410092">2</a></sup> experience<sup><a id="n410093" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n410093">3</a></sup> death before they see the kingdom of God come with power.”<sup><a id="n410094" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n410094">4</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Transfiguration </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:2</span> Six days later<sup><a id="n410095" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n410095">5</a></sup> Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John and led them alone up a high mountain privately. And he was transfigured before them,<sup><a id="n410096" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n410096">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:3</span> and his clothes became radiantly white, more so than any launderer in the world could bleach them. <span class="verse">9:4</span> Then Elijah appeared before them along with Moses,<sup><a id="n410097" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n410097">7</a></sup> and they were talking with Jesus. <span class="verse">9:5</span> So<sup><a id="n410098" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n410098">8</a></sup> Peter said to Jesus,<sup><a id="n410099" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n410099">9</a></sup> “Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. Let us make three shelters<sup><a id="n4100910" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100910">10</a></sup> —one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” <span class="verse">9:6</span> (For they were afraid, and he did not know what to say.)<sup><a id="n4100911" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100911">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:7</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100912" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100912">12</a></sup> a cloud<sup><a id="n4100913" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100913">13</a></sup> overshadowed them,<sup><a id="n4100914" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100914">14</a></sup> and a voice came from the cloud, “This is my one dear Son.<sup><a id="n4100915" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100915">15</a></sup> Listen to him!”<sup><a id="n4100916" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100916">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:8</span> Suddenly when they looked around, they saw no one with them any more except Jesus. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:9</span> As they were coming down from the mountain, he gave them orders not to tell anyone what they had seen until after the Son of Man had risen from the dead. <span class="verse">9:10</span> They kept this statement to themselves, discussing what this rising from the dead meant. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:11</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100917" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100917">17</a></sup> they asked him,<sup><a id="n4100918" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100918">18</a></sup> “Why do the experts in the law<sup><a id="n4100919" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100919">19</a></sup> say that Elijah must come first?” <span class="verse">9:12</span> He said to them, “Elijah does indeed come first, and restores all things. And why is it written that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be despised? <span class="verse">9:13</span> But I tell you that Elijah has certainly come, and they did to him whatever they wanted, just as it is written about him.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Disciples’ Failure to Heal </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:14</span> When they came to the disciples, they saw a large crowd around them and experts in the law<sup><a id="n4100920" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100920">20</a></sup> arguing with them. <span class="verse">9:15</span> When the whole crowd saw him, they were amazed and ran<sup><a id="n4100921" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100921">21</a></sup> at once and greeted him. <span class="verse">9:16</span> He asked them, “What are you arguing about with them?” <span class="verse">9:17</span> A member of the crowd said to him, “Teacher, I brought you my son, who is possessed by a spirit that makes him mute. <span class="verse">9:18</span> Whenever it seizes him, it throws him down, and he foams at the mouth, grinds his teeth, and becomes rigid. I asked your disciples to cast it out, but<sup><a id="n4100922" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100922">22</a></sup> they were not able to do so.”<sup><a id="n4100923" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100923">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:19</span> He answered them,<sup><a id="n4100924" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100924">24</a></sup> “You<sup><a id="n4100925" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100925">25</a></sup> unbelieving<sup><a id="n4100926" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100926">26</a></sup> generation! How much longer<sup><a id="n4100927" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100927">27</a></sup> must I be with you? How much longer must I endure<sup><a id="n4100928" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100928">28</a></sup> you?<sup><a id="n4100929" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100929">29</a></sup> Bring him to me.” <span class="verse">9:20</span> So they brought the boy<sup><a id="n4100930" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100930">30</a></sup> to him. When the spirit saw him, it immediately threw the boy into a convulsion. He<sup><a id="n4100931" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100931">31</a></sup> fell on the ground and rolled around, foaming at the mouth. <span class="verse">9:21</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100932" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100932">32</a></sup> asked his father, “How long has this been happening to him?” And he said, “From childhood. <span class="verse">9:22</span> It has often thrown him into fire or water to destroy him. But if you are able to do anything, have compassion on us and help us.” <span class="verse">9:23</span> Then Jesus said to him, “‘If you are able?’<sup><a id="n4100933" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100933">33</a></sup> All things are possible for the one who believes.” <span class="verse">9:24</span> Immediately the father of the boy cried out and said, “I believe; help my unbelief!” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:25</span> Now when Jesus saw that a crowd was quickly gathering, he rebuked<sup><a id="n4100934" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100934">34</a></sup> the unclean spirit,<sup><a id="n4100935" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100935">35</a></sup> saying to it, “Mute and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him and never enter him again.” <span class="verse">9:26</span> It shrieked, threw him into terrible convulsions, and came out. The boy<sup><a id="n4100936" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100936">36</a></sup> looked so much like a corpse that many said, “He is dead!” <span class="verse">9:27</span> But Jesus gently took his hand and raised him to his feet, and he stood up. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:28</span> Then,<sup><a id="n4100937" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100937">37</a></sup> after he went into the house, his disciples asked him privately, “Why couldn’t we cast it out?” <span class="verse">9:29</span> He told them, “This kind can come out only by prayer.”<sup><a id="n4100938" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100938">38</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Second Prediction of Jesus’ Death and Resurrection </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:30</span> They went out from there and passed through Galilee. But<sup><a id="n4100939" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100939">39</a></sup> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100940" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100940">40</a></sup> did not want anyone to know, <span class="verse">9:31</span> for he was teaching his disciples and telling them, “The Son of Man will be betrayed into the hands of men.<sup><a id="n4100941" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100941">41</a></sup> They<sup><a id="n4100942" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100942">42</a></sup> will kill him,<sup><a id="n4100943" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100943">43</a></sup> and after three days he will rise.”<sup><a id="n4100944" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100944">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:32</span> But they did not understand this statement and were afraid to ask him. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Questions About the Greatest </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:33</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100945" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100945">45</a></sup> they came to Capernaum.<sup><a id="n4100946" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100946">46</a></sup> After Jesus<sup><a id="n4100947" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100947">47</a></sup> was inside the house he asked them, “What were you discussing on the way?” <span class="verse">9:34</span> But they were silent, for on the way they had argued with one another about who was the greatest. <span class="verse">9:35</span> After he sat down, he called the twelve and said to them, “If anyone wants to be first, he must be last of all and servant of all.” <span class="verse">9:36</span> He took a little child and had him stand among them. Taking him in his arms, he said to them, <span class="verse">9:37</span> “Whoever welcomes<sup><a id="n4100948" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100948">48</a></sup> one of these little children<sup><a id="n4100949" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100949">49</a></sup> in my name welcomes me, and whoever welcomes me does not welcome me but the one who sent me.” </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">On Jesus’ Side </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:38</span> John said to him, “Teacher, we saw someone casting out demons in your name, and we tried to stop him because he was not following us.” <span class="verse">9:39</span> But Jesus said, “Do not stop him, because no one who does a miracle in my name will be able soon afterward to say anything bad about me. <span class="verse">9:40</span> For whoever is not against us is for us. <span class="verse">9:41</span> For I tell you the truth,<sup><a id="n4100950" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100950">50</a></sup> whoever gives you a cup of water because<sup><a id="n4100951" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100951">51</a></sup> you bear Christ’s<sup><a id="n4100952" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100952">52</a></sup> name will never lose his reward. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:42</span> “If anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to have a huge millstone<sup><a id="n4100953" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100953">53</a></sup> tied around his neck and to be thrown into the sea. <span class="verse">9:43</span> If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off! It is better for you to enter into life crippled than to have<sup><a id="n4100954" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100954">54</a></sup> two hands and go into hell,<sup><a id="n4100955" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100955">55</a></sup> to the unquenchable fire.<sup><a id="n4100956" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100956">56</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:45</span> If your foot causes you to sin, cut it off! It is better to enter life lame than to have<sup><a id="n4100957" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100957">57</a></sup> two feet and be thrown into hell.<sup><a id="n4100958" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100958">58</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:47</span> If your eye causes you to sin, tear it out!<sup><a id="n4100959" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100959">59</a></sup> It is better to enter into the kingdom of God<sup><a id="n4100960" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100960">60</a></sup> with one eye than to have<sup><a id="n4100961" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100961">61</a></sup> two eyes and be thrown into hell, <span class="verse">9:48</span> where their worm never dies and the fire is never quenched. <span class="verse">9:49</span> Everyone will be salted with fire.<sup><a id="n4100962" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100962">62</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:50</span> Salt<sup><a id="n4100963" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100963">63</a></sup> is good, but if it loses its saltiness,<sup><a id="n4100964" href="file1007_notes.xhtml#n4100964">64</a></sup> how can you make it salty again? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with each other.” </p>

</body>
</html>