<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 6</h2>
<p id="n460061"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n460061">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “if you have ordinary lawsuits, appoint as judges those who have no standing in the church!” This alternative reading (cf. KJV, NIV) takes the Greek verb <span class="greek">καθίζετε</span> (<span class="translit">kathizete</span>) as an ironic imperative instead of a question. This verb comes, however, at the end of the sentence. It is not impossible that Paul meant for it to be understood this way, but its placement in the sentence does not make this probable.</p></p>
<p id="n460062"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n460062">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to decide between his brother (and his opponent),” but see the note on the word “Christian” in 5:11.</p></p>
<p id="n460063"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n460063">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “does a brother sue a brother,” but see the note on the word “Christian” in 5:11.</p></p>
<p id="n460064"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n460064">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” The Greek term “brother” literally refers to family relationships, but here it is used in a broader sense to connote familial relationships within the family of God (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 2.a). See also the note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n460065"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n460065">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term is sometimes rendered “effeminate,” although in contemporary English usage such a translation could be taken to refer to demeanor rather than behavior. BDAG 613 s.v. <span class="greek">μαλακός</span> 2 has “pert. to being passive in a same-sex relationship, <i>effeminate</i> esp. of <i>catamites</i>, of men and boys who are sodomized by other males in such a relationship.” L&amp;N 88.281 states, “the passive male partner in homosexual intercourse—‘homosexual.’…As in Greek, a number of other languages also have entirely distinct terms for the active and passive roles in homosexual intercourse.” See also the discussion in G. D. Fee, <i>First Corinthians</i> (NICNT), 243-44. A number of modern translations have adopted the phrase “male prostitutes” for <span class="greek">μαλακοί</span> in 1 Cor 6:9 (NIV, NRSV, NLT) but this could be misunderstood by the modern reader to mean “males who sell their services to women,” while the term in question appears, at least in context, to relate to homosexual activity between males. Furthermore, it is far from certain that prostitution as commonly understood (the selling of sexual favors) is specified here, as opposed to a consensual relationship. Thus the translation “passive homosexual partners” has been used here.</p></p>
<p id="n460066"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n460066">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term BDAG 135 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀρσενοκοίτης</span> states, “a male who engages in sexual activity w. a pers. of his own sex, <i>pederast</i> 1 Cor 6:9…of one who assumes the dominant role in same-sex activity, opp. <span class="greek">μαλακός</span>…1 Ti 1:10; Pol 5:3. Cp. Ro 1:27.” L&amp;N 88.280 states, “a male partner in homosexual intercourse—‘homosexual.’…It is possible that <span class="greek">ἀρσενοκοίτης</span> in certain contexts refers to the active male partner in homosexual intercourse in contrast with <span class="greek">μαλακός</span>, the passive male partner.” Since there is a distinction in contemporary usage between sexual orientation and actual behavior, the qualification “practicing” was supplied in the translation, following the emphasis in BDAG.</p></p>
<p id="n460067"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n460067">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “revilers”; BDAG 602 s.v. <span class="greek">λοίδορος</span> defines the term as “<i>reviler, abusive person</i>.” Because the term “abusive” without further qualification has become associated in contemporary English with both physical and sexual abuse, the qualifier “verbally” has been supplied in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n460068"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n460068">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and some [of you] were these.”</p></p>
<p id="n460069"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n460069">9</a> <p><b>tc</b> The external evidence in support of the reading <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsou Christou</span>, “Jesus Christ”) is quite impressive: <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>11vid,46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C<sup>vid</sup> D* P 33 81 104 365 629 630 1739 1881 2464 <i>al</i> lat bo as well as several fathers, while the reading with merely <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> has significantly poorer support (A D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span> sa). Although the wording of the original could certainly have been expanded, it is also possible that <span class="greek">Χριστοῦ</span> as a <i>nomen sacrum</i> could have accidentally dropped out. Although the latter is not as likely under normal circumstances, in light of the early and widespread witnesses for the fuller expression, the wording of the <i>Ausgangstext</i> seems to have been <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4600610"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n4600610">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>All things are lawful for me</i>. In the expressions in vv. 12-13 within quotation marks, Paul cites certain slogans the Corinthians apparently used to justify their behavior. Paul agrees with the slogans in part, but corrects them to show how the Corinthians have misused these ideas.</p></p>
<p id="n4600611"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n4600611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “both this [stomach] and these [foods].”</p><p><b>sn</b> There is debate as to the extent of the Corinthian slogan which Paul quotes here. Some argue that the slogan is only the first sentence—“Food is for the stomach and the stomach is for food”—with the second statement forming Paul’s rejoinder, while others argue that the slogan contains both sentences (as in the translation above). The argument which favors the latter is the tight conceptual and grammatical parallelism which occurs if Paul’s response begins with “The body is not for sexual immorality” and then continues through the end of v. 14. For discussion and diagrams of this structure, see G. D. Fee, <i>First Corinthians</i> (NICNT), 253-57.</p></p>
<p id="n4600612"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n4600612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “is in relationship with.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600613"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n4600613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is one body,” implying the association “with her.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600614"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n4600614">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Gen 2:24.</p></p>
<p id="n4600615"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n4600615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in relationship with.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600616"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n4600616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is one spirit,” implying the association “with him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600617"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n4600617">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> It is debated whether this is a Corinthian slogan. If it is not, then Paul is essentially arguing that there are two types of sin, nonsexual sins which take place outside the body and sexual sins which are against a person’s very own body. If it is a Corinthian slogan, then it is a slogan used by the Corinthians to justify their immoral behavior. With it they are claiming that anything done in the body or through the body had no moral relevance. A decision here is very difficult, but the latter is to be preferred for two main reasons. (1) This is the most natural understanding of the statement as it is written. To construe it as a statement by Paul requires a substantial clarification in the sense (e.g., “All <i>other</i> sins…” [NIV]). (2) Theologically the former is more difficult: Why would Paul single out sexual sins as more intrinsically related to the body than other sins, such as gluttony or drunkenness? For these reasons, it is more likely that the phrase in quotation marks is indeed a Corinthian slogan which Paul turns against them in the course of his argument, although the decision must be regarded as tentative.</p></p>
<p id="n4600618"><a href="file1114.xhtml#n4600618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ‘in you’ Holy Spirit.” The position of the prepositional phrase <span class="greek">ἐν ὑμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">en humin</span>, “in you”) between the article and the adjective effectively places the prepositional phrase in first attributive position. Such constructions are generally translated into English as relative clauses.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
