<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 1</h2>
<p id="n660011"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n660011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase <span class="greek">ἀποκάλυψις ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">apokalupsis Iēsou Christou</span>, “the revelation of Jesus Christ”) could be interpreted as either an objective genitive (“the revelation about Jesus Christ”), subjective genitive (“the revelation from Jesus Christ”), or both (M. Zerwick’s “general” genitive [<i>Biblical Greek</i>, §§36-39]; D. B. Wallace’s “plenary” genitive [<i>ExSyn</i> 119-21]). In 1:1 and 22:16 it is clear that Jesus has sent his angel to proclaim the message to John; thus the message is from Christ, and this would be a subjective genitive. On a broader scale, though, the revelation is about Christ, so this would be an objective genitive. One important point to note is that the phrase under consideration is best regarded as the title of the book and therefore refers to the whole of the work in all its aspects. This fact favors considering this as a plenary genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n660012"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n660012">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “slaves.” Although this translation frequently renders <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) as “slave,” the connotation is often of one who has sold himself into slavery; in a spiritual sense, the idea is that of becoming a slave of God or of Jesus Christ voluntarily. The voluntary notion is conspicuous here; hence, the translation “servants.” In any case, the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). A good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>), in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force.</p></p>
<p id="n660013"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n660013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 992-93 s.v. <span class="greek">τάχος</span> has “<i>quickly, at once, without delay</i> Ac 10:33 D; 12:7; 17:15 D; 22:18; 1 Cl 48:1; 63:4…<i>soon</i>, <i>in a short time</i>…Rv 1:1; 22:6…<i>shortly</i> Ac 25:4.”</p></p>
<p id="n660014"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n660014">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “He indicated it clearly” (L&amp;N 33.153).</p></p>
<p id="n660015"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n660015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” earlier in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n660016"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n660016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Then” is not in the Greek text, but is supplied to make the chronological succession clear in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n660017"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n660017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive phrase “about Jesus Christ” is taken as an objective genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n660018"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n660018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “this” is used to translate the Greek article <span class="greek">τῆς</span> (<span class="translit">tēs</span>), bringing out its demonstrative force.</p></p>
<p id="n660019"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n660019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “aloud” has been supplied to indicate that in the original historical setting reading would usually refer to reading out loud in public rather than silently to oneself.</p></p>
<p id="n6600110"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “blessed are” are repeated from the beginning of this verse for stylistic reasons and for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n6600111"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “keep.” L&amp;N 36.19 has “to continue to obey orders or commandments—‘to obey, to keep commandments, obedience.’”</p></p>
<p id="n6600112"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600112">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The time</i> refers to the time when the things prophesied would happen.</p></p>
<p id="n6600113"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “John.” The word “From” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n6600114"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n6600115"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> It is probable that the <span class="greek">ὑμῖν</span> (<span class="translit">humin</span>) applies to both elements of the greeting, i.e., to both grace and peace.</p></p>
<p id="n6600116"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600116">16</a> <p><b>tc</b> The earliest and best <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>18vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C P 2050 <i>al</i> lat sy co) lack the term “God” (<span class="greek">θεοῦ</span>, <span class="translit">theou</span>) between “from” (<span class="greek">ἀπό</span>, <span class="translit">apo</span>) and “he who is” (<span class="greek">ὁ ὤν</span>, <span class="translit">ho ōn</span>). Its inclusion, as supported by the bulk of the Byzantine witnesses, is clearly secondary and a scribal attempt to achieve two things: (1) to make explicit the referent in the passage, namely, God, and (2) to smooth out the grammar. The preposition “from” in Greek required a noun in the genitive case. But here in Rev 1:4 the words following the preposition “from” (<span class="greek">ἀπό</span>) are in another case, i.e., the nominative. There are two principal ways in which to deal with this grammatical anomaly. First, it could be a mistake arising from someone who just did not know Greek very well, or as a Jew, was heavily influenced by a Semitic form of Greek. Both of these unintentional errors are unlikely here. Commenting on this <i>ExSyn</i> 63 argues: “Either of these is doubtful here because (1) such a flagrant misunderstanding of the rudiments of Greek would almost surely mean that the author could not compose in Greek, yet the Apocalypse itself argues against this; (2) nowhere else does the Seer [i.e., John] use a nom. immediately after a preposition (in fact, he uses <span class="greek">ἀπό</span> 32 times with the gen. immediately following).” The passage appears to be an allusion to Exod 3:14 (in the LXX) where God refers to himself as “he who is” (<span class="greek">ὁ ὤν</span>), the same wording in Greek as here in Rev 1:4. Thus, it appears that John is wanting to leave the divine name untouched (perhaps to allude to God’s immutability, or as a pointer to the Old Testament as the key to unlocking the meaning of this book), irrespective of what it “looks” like grammatically. The translation has placed the “he who is” in quotation marks to indicate to the reader that the syntactical awkwardness is intentional. (For further comments, see <i>ExSyn</i> 63).</p></p>
<p id="n6600117"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 106 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπό</span> 5.d states: “The expr. <span class="greek">εἰρήνη ἀπὸ</span> ‘<span class="greek">ὁ ὢν καὶ ὁ ἦν καὶ ὁ ἐρχόμενος</span>’ Rv 1:4 is quite extraordinary. It may be an interpretation of the name Yahweh already current, or an attempt to show reverence for the divine name by preserving it unchanged, or simply one more of the grammatical peculiarities so frequent in Rv.” </p></p>
<p id="n6600118"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Jesus Christ—the faithful one, the witness…” Some take <span class="greek">ὁ πιστός</span> (<span class="translit">ho pistos</span>) as a second substantive in relation to <span class="greek">ὁ μάρτυς</span> (<span class="translit">ho martus</span>). In the present translation, however, <span class="greek">ὁ πιστός</span> was taken as an adjective in attributive position to <span class="greek">ὁ μάρτυς</span>. The idea of martyrdom and faithfulness are intimately connected. See BDAG 820 s.v. <span class="greek">πιστός</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">α</span>: “<span class="greek">ὁ μάρτυς μου ὁ πιστός μου</span> Rv 2:13 (<span class="greek">μάρτυς</span> 3); in this ‘book of martyrs’ Christ is <span class="greek">ὁ μάρτυς ὁ πιστὸς</span> (<span class="greek">καὶ ὁ ἀληθινός</span>) 1:5; 3:14; cp. 19:11 (the combination of <span class="greek">ἀληθινός</span> and <span class="greek">πιστός</span> in the last two passages is like 3 Macc 2:11). Cp. Rv 17:14.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600119"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600119">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek term translated <i>witness</i> can mean both “witness” and “martyr.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600120"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600120">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading “set free” (<span class="greek">λύσαντι</span>, <span class="translit">lusanti</span>) has better ms support (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>18</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C 1611 2050 2329 2351 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup> sy) than its rival, <span class="greek">λούσαντι</span> (<span class="translit">lousanti</span>, “washed”; found in P 1006 1841 1854 2053 2062 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>K</sup> lat bo). Internally, it seems that the reading “washed” could have arisen in at least one of three ways: (1) as an error of hearing (both “released” and “washed” are pronounced similarly in Greek); (2) an error of sight (both “released” and “washed” look very similar—a difference of only one letter—which could have resulted in a simple error during the copying of a ms); (3) through scribal inability to appreciate that the Hebrew preposition <span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span> can be used with a noun to indicate the price paid <i>for</i> something. Since the author of Revelation is influenced significantly by a Semitic form of Greek (e.g., 13:10), and since the Hebrew preposition “in” (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span>) can indicate the price paid <i>for</i> something, and is often translated with the preposition “in” (<span class="greek">ἐν</span>, <span class="translit">en</span>) in the LXX, the author may have tried to communicate by the use of <span class="greek">ἐν</span> the idea of a price paid for something. That is, John was trying to say that Christ delivered us at the price of his own blood. This whole process, however, may have been lost on a later scribe, who being unfamiliar with Hebrew, found the expression “<i>delivered in</i> his blood” too difficult, and noticing the obvious similarities between <span class="greek">λύσαντι</span> and <span class="greek">λούσαντι</span>, assumed an error and then proceeded to change the text to “washed in his blood”—a thought more tolerable in his mind. Both readings, of course, are true to scripture; the current question is what the author wrote in this verse.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “and released us” (L&amp;N 37.127).</p></p>
<p id="n6600121"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600121">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The style here is somewhat Semitic, with the use of the <span class="greek">ἐν</span> (<span class="translit">en</span>) + the dative to mean “at the price of.” The addition of “own” in the English is stylistic and is an attempt to bring out the personal nature of the statement and the sacrificial aspect of Jesus’ death—a frequent refrain in the Apocalypse.</p></p>
<p id="n6600122"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ποιέω</span> (<span class="translit">poieō</span>) can indicate appointment or assignment rather than simply “make” or “do.” See Mark 3:14 (L&amp;N 37.106).</p></p>
<p id="n6600123"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600123">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> See BDAG 168 s.v. <span class="greek">βασιλεία</span> 1.a for the idea of “he made us a kingdom,” which was translated as “he appointed us (to be or function) as a kingdom” (see the note on the word “appointed” earlier in the verse).</p></p>
<p id="n6600124"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a kingdom, priests.” The term <span class="greek">ἱερεῖς</span> (<span class="translit">hiereis</span>) is either in apposition to <span class="greek">βασιλείαν</span> (<span class="translit">basileian</span>) or as a second complement to the object “us” (<span class="greek">ἡμᾶς</span>, <span class="translit">hēmas</span>). The translation retains this ambiguity.</p></p>
<p id="n6600125"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600125">25</a> <p><b>tc</b> Both the longer reading <span class="greek">τῶν αἰώνων</span> (<span class="translit">tōn aiōnōn</span>, “to the ages of the ages” or, more idiomatically, “for ever <i>and ever</i>”; found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C <span class="apparatus">M</span>) and the shorter (“for ever”; found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>18</sup> A P 2050 bo) have good ms support. The author uses the longer expression (<span class="greek">εἰς</span> [<span class="greek">τοὺς</span>]<span class="greek"> αἰῶνας</span> [<span class="greek">τῶν</span>]<span class="greek"> αἰώνων</span>, <span class="translit">eis</span> [<span class="translit">tous</span>] <span class="translit">aiōnas</span> [<span class="translit">tōn</span>] <span class="translit">aiōnōn</span>) in <i>every</i> other instance of <span class="greek">αἰών</span> in Revelation, twelve passages in all (1:18; 4:9, 10; 5:13; 7:12; 10:6; 11:15; 14:11; 15:7; 19:3; 20:10; 22:5). Thus, on the one hand, the style of the author is consistent, while on the other hand, the scribes may have been familiar with such a stylistic feature, causing them to add the words here. The issues are more complex than can be presented here; the longer reading, however, is probably authentic (the shorter reading arising from accidental omission of the genitive phrase due to similarity with the preceding words).</p></p>
<p id="n6600126"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600126">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Dan 7:13.</p></p>
<p id="n6600127"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) was translated as ascensive.</p></p>
<p id="n6600128"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600128">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Zech 12:10.</p></p>
<p id="n6600129"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> In this context, <i>tribes</i> (<span class="greek">φυλαί</span>, <span class="translit">phulai</span>) could also be translated as “nations” or “peoples” (L&amp;N 11.56).</p></p>
<p id="n6600130"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600130">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The conjunction <span class="greek">ἐπί</span> (<span class="translit">epi</span>) is most likely causal here. The people who crucified him are those of every tribe on the earth and they will mourn because he comes as judge.</p></p>
<p id="n6600131"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Yes, Amen.” The expression “This will certainly come to pass” is an attempt to capture the force of the juxtaposition of the Greek <span class="greek">ναί</span> (<span class="translit">nai</span>) and the Hebrew <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>). See L&amp;N 69.1.</p></p>
<p id="n6600132"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600132">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> These lines are placed in parentheses because they form an aside to the main argument.</p></p>
<p id="n6600133"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600133">33</a> <p><b>tc</b> The shorter reading “Omega” (<span class="greek">ὦ</span>, <span class="translit">ō</span>) has superior ms evidence (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> A C 1611) to the longer reading which includes “the beginning and the end” (<span class="greek">ἀρχὴ καὶ τέλος</span> or <span class="greek">ἡ ἀρχὴ καὶ τὸ τέλος</span>, <span class="translit">archē kai telos</span> or <span class="translit">hē archē kai to telos</span>), found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*<sup>,2</sup> 1854 2050 2329 2351 <span class="apparatus">M</span><sup>A</sup> lat bo. There is little reason why a scribe would have deleted the words, but their clarifying value and the fact that they harmonize with 21:6 indicate that they are a secondary addition to the text.</p></p>
<p id="n6600134"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this word BDAG 755 s.v. <span class="greek">παντοκράτωρ</span> states, “the <i>Almighty, All-Powerful, Omnipotent</i> (<i>One</i>) only of God…(<span class="greek">ὁ</span>)<span class="greek"> κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ π</span>.…Rv 1:8; 4:8; 11:17; 15:3; 16:7; 21:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600135"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation attempts to bring out the verbal idea in <span class="greek">συγκοινωνός</span> (<span class="translit">sunkoinōnos</span>, “co-sharer”); John was suffering for his faith at the time he wrote this.</p></p>
<p id="n6600136"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> The prepositional phrase <span class="greek">ἐν</span> <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">en Iēsou</span>) could be taken with <span class="greek">ὑπομονῇ</span> (<span class="translit">hupomonē</span>) as the translation does or with the more distant <span class="greek">συγκοινωνός</span> (<span class="translit">sunkoinōnos</span>), in which case the translation would read “your brother and the one who shares with you in Jesus in the persecution, kingdom, and endurance.” </p></p>
<p id="n6600137"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “about Jesus” has been translated as an objective genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n6600138"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600138">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the spirit.” “Spirit” could refer either to the Holy Spirit or the human spirit, but in either case John was in “a state of spiritual exaltation best described as a trance” (R. H. Mounce, <i>Revelation</i> [NICNT], 75).</p></p>
<p id="n6600139"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600139">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Concerning the phrase <span class="greek">κυριακῇ ἡμέρᾳ</span> (<span class="translit">kuriakē hēmera</span>) BDAG 576 s.v. <span class="greek">κυριακός</span> states: “pert. to belonging to the Lord<i>, the Lord’s</i>…<span class="greek">κ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἡμέρᾳ</span> <i>the Lord’s day</i> (Kephal. I 192, 1; 193, 31…) i.e. certainly Sunday (so in Mod. Gk….) Rv 1:10 (WStott, NTS 12, ’65, 70-75).”</p></p>
<p id="n6600140"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> The conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) is not introducing a coordinate thought, but one that is logically subordinate to the main verb <span class="greek">ἐγενόμην</span> (<span class="translit">egenomēn</span>). </p></p>
<p id="n6600142"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and to Smyrna.” For stylistic reasons the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) and the preposition <span class="greek">εἰς</span> (<span class="translit">eis</span>) have not been translated before the remaining elements of the list. In lists with more than two elements contemporary English generally does not repeat the conjunction except between the next to last and last elements.</p></p>
<p id="n6600143"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Throughout the translation John’s use of <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) often reflects the varied usage of the Hebrew conjunction <span class="hebrew">&#8207;ו&#8206;</span> (<span class="translit">vav</span>). A clause which <span class="greek">καί</span> introduces has been translated in terms of its semantic relationship to the clause that preceded it. If the <span class="greek">καί</span> seemed redundant, however, it was left untranslated; that is the case in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n6600144"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with me.” The translation “with me” implies that John was engaged in a dialogue with the one speaking to him (e.g., Jesus or an angel) when in reality it was a one-sided conversation, with John doing all the listening. For this reason, <span class="greek">μετ᾿ ἐμοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">met</span>’<span class="translit"> emou</span>, “with me”) was translated as “to me.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600145"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and turning I saw.” The repetition of <span class="greek">ἐπιστρέφω</span> (<span class="translit">epistrephō</span>) is somewhat redundant in contemporary English and has been translated generally.</p></p>
<p id="n6600146"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> This phrase constitutes an allusion to Dan 7:13. Concerning <span class="greek">υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου</span> (<span class="translit">huios tou anthrōpou</span>), BDAG 1026 s.v. <span class="greek">υἱός</span> 2.d.<span class="greek">γ</span> says: “<span class="greek">ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου</span> lit. ‘the son of the man’…‘the human being, the human one, the man’…On Israelite thought contemporary w. Jesus and alleged knowledge of a heavenly being looked upon as a ‘Son of Man’ or ‘Man’, who exercises Messianic functions such as judging the world (metaph., pictorial passages in En 46-48; 4 Esdr 13:3, 51f)…Outside the gospels: Ac 7:56…Rv 1:13; 14:14 (both after Da 7:13…).” The term “son” here in this expression is anarthrous and as such lacks specificity. Some commentators and translations take the expression as an allusion to Daniel 7:13 and not to “the son of man” found in gospel traditions (e.g., Mark 8:31; 9:12; cf. D. E. Aune, <i>Revelation</i> [WBC], 2:800-801; cf. also NIV). Other commentators and versions, however, take the phrase “son of man” as <i>definite</i>, involving allusions to Dan 7:13 and “the son of man” gospel traditions (see G. K. Beale, <i>Revelation</i> [NIGTC], 771-72; NRSV).</p></p>
<p id="n6600147"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600147">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a wide golden sash,” but this would not be diagonal, as some modern sashes are, but horizontal. The Greek term can refer to a wide band of cloth or leather worn on the outside of one’s clothing (L&amp;N 6.178).</p></p>
<p id="n6600148"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600148">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n6600149"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The clause, “even as white as snow” seems to heighten the preceding clause and is so understood in this ascensive sense (“even”) in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6600150"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600150">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> The genitive noun <span class="greek">πυρός</span> (<span class="translit">puros</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n6600151"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600151">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> The precise meaning of the term translated “polished bronze” (<span class="greek">χαλκολιβάνῳ</span>, <span class="translit">chalkolibanō</span>), which appears nowhere else in Greek literature outside of the book of Revelation (see 2:18), is uncertain. Without question it is some sort of metal. BDAG 1076 s.v. <span class="greek">χαλκολίβανον</span> suggests “<i>fine brass/bronze</i>.” L&amp;N 2.57 takes the word to refer to particularly valuable or fine bronze, but notes that the emphasis here and in Rev 2:18 is more on the lustrous quality of the metal.</p></p>
<p id="n6600152"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600152">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “that has been heated in a furnace until it glows.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600153"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600153">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sound,” but the idea is closer to the roar of a waterfall or rapids.</p></p>
<p id="n6600154"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600154">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and having.” In the Greek text this is a continuation of the previous sentence, but because contemporary English style employs much shorter sentences, a new sentence was started here in the translation by supplying the pronoun “he.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600155"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600155">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a continuation of the previous sentence in the Greek text, but a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n6600156"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600156">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600157"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600157">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the Greek conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as a contrastive (“but”) due to the contrast between the two clauses.</p></p>
<p id="n6600158"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600158">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600159"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600159">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Concerning “Hades” BDAG 19 s.v. <span class="greek">ᾅδης</span> 1 and 2 states: “Orig. proper noun, god of the nether world, ‘Hades’, then <i>the nether world</i>, <i>Hades</i> as place of the dead, Ac 2:27, 31 (Ps 16:10; Eccl 9:10; PGM 1, 179; 16, 8; Philo, Mos. 1, 195; Jos., Bell. 1, 596, Ant. 6, 332). Of Jonah’s fish <span class="greek">ἐκ τοῦ κατωτάτου</span> <span class="greek">ᾅδου</span>. In the depths, contrasted w. heaven <span class="greek">ἕως</span> (<span class="greek">τοῦ</span>)<span class="greek"> ᾅδου</span> Mt 11:23; Lk 10:15 (PsSol 15:10; cf.; Is 14:11, 15); <span class="greek">ἐν τῷ ᾅδῃ</span> 16:23; <span class="greek">ἐν ῝Αιδου</span> ApcPt Rainer. Accessible by gates (but the pl. is also used [e.g. Hom., X., Ael. Aristid. 47, 20 K.=23 p. 450 D.] when only one gate is meant), hence <span class="greek">πύλαι ᾅδου</span> (Il. 5, 646; Is 38:10; Wsd 16:13; 3 Macc 5:51; Pss. Sol. 16:2.—Lucian, Menipp. 6 the magicians can open <span class="greek">τοῦ ῝Αιδου τὰς πύλας</span> and conduct people in and out safely) Mt 16:18…locked <span class="greek">ἔχω τὰς κλεῖς τοῦ θανάτου καὶ τοῦ ᾅδου</span> Rv 1:18 (the genitives are either obj. [Ps.-Apollod. 3, 12, 6, 10 Aeacus, the son of Zeus holds the <span class="greek">κλεῖς τοῦ ῝Αιδου</span>; SEG VIII, 574, 3 (III ad) <span class="greek">τῷ τὰς κλεῖδας ἔχοντι τῶν καθ᾿ ῝Αιδου</span> (restored)] or possess.; in the latter case death and Hades are personif.; s. 2)…<i>Hades</i> personif.…w. <span class="greek">θάνατος</span> (cf. Is 28:15; Job 38:17…) Rv 6:8; 20:13f.” </p><p><b>sn</b> In the OT, <i>Hades</i> was known as <i>Sheol</i>. It is the place where the unrighteous will reside (Matt 11:23; Luke 16:23; Rev 20:13-14).</p></p>
<p id="n6600160"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600160">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Therefore write the things that you saw, and the things that are, and the things that will take place after these things.” Verse 19 could also be translated (taking <span class="greek">καί</span>…<span class="greek">καί</span> [<span class="translit">kai</span>…<span class="translit">kai</span>] as “both…and”): “Therefore write what you have seen, both what things currently are and what is going to happen after these things.” The structure of this verse is debated.</p></p>
<p id="n6600161"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600161">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “is this” are supplied to make a complete sentence in English.</p></p>
<p id="n6600162"><a href="file1234.xhtml#n6600162">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps “the messengers.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
