<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Corinthians 9</h2>
<p id="n470091"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n470091">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “it is superfluous.”</p></p>
<p id="n470092"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n470092">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “this ministry,” “this contribution.”</p></p>
<p id="n470093"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n470093">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to help” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n470094"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n470094">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “concerning which I keep boasting to the Macedonians about you.” A new sentence was started here and the translation was simplified by removing the relative clause and repeating the antecedent “this eagerness of yours.”</p></p>
<p id="n470095"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n470095">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to give” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n470096"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n470096">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to participate” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n470097"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n470097">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Most of them</i> is a reference to the Macedonians (cf. v. 4).</p></p>
<p id="n470098"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n470098">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb has been translated as an epistolary aorist.</p></p>
<p id="n470099"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n470099">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, ready with the collection for the saints.</p></p>
<p id="n4700910"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “be disgraced”; <i>Grk</i> “be put to shame.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700911"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700911">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by this confidence”; the words “we had in you” are not in the Greek text, but are supplied as a necessary clarification for the English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4700912"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700912">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the blessing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700913"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700913">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a blessing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700914"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700914">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as a covetousness”; that is, a gift given grudgingly or under compulsion.</p></p>
<p id="n4700915"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700915">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bountifully”; so also in the next occurrence in the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4700916"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700916">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “must do.” The words “of you” and “should give” are not in the Greek text, which literally reads, “Each one just as he has decided in his heart.” The missing words are an ellipsis; these or similar phrases must be supplied for the English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4700917"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in his mind.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700918"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700918">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “not from regret”; <i>Grk</i> “not out of grief.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700919"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “not out of a sense of duty”; <i>Grk</i> “from necessity.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700920"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700920">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “abound.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700921"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700921">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “so that by having enough.” The Greek participle can be translated as a participle of cause (“because you have enough”) or means (“by having enough”).</p></p>
<p id="n4700922"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700922">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “abound.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700923"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700923">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He</i> in the quotation refers to the righteous person.</p></p>
<p id="n4700924"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700924">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 112:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4700925"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700925">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4700926"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700926">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in every way for every generosity,” or “he will always make you rich enough to be generous at all times” (L&amp;N 57.29).</p></p>
<p id="n4700927"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700927">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “not only supplying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700928"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700928">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “proof,” or perhaps “testing” (NRSV).</p></p>
<p id="n4700929"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700929">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “ministry.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700930"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700930">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “your partnership”; <i>Grk</i> “your fellowship.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700931"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700931">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the extraordinary grace of God to you”; the point is that God has given or shown grace to the Corinthians.</p></p>
<p id="n4700932"><a href="file1134.xhtml#n4700932">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Let us thank God for his gift which cannot be described with words” (L&amp;N 33.202).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
