<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Mark 9</h2>
<p id="n4100851"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100851">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100852"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100852">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100853"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100853">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to follow after me.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100854"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100854">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> This translation better expresses the force of the Greek third person imperative than the traditional “let him deny,” which could be understood as merely permissive.</p></p>
<p id="n4100855"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100855">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> To bear the cross means to accept the rejection of the world for turning to Jesus and following him. Discipleship involves a death that is like a crucifixion; see Gal 6:14.</p></p>
<p id="n4100856"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100856">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “soul” (throughout vv. 35-37). The Greek <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) has many different meanings depending on the context. The two primary meanings here are the earthly life (animate life, sometimes called “physical life”) and the inner life (the life that transcends the earthly life, sometimes called “the soul”). The fact that the Greek term can have both meanings creates in this verse both a paradox and a wordplay. The desire to preserve both aspects of <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) for oneself creates the tension here (cf. BDAG 1099 s.v. 1.a; 2.d,e). Translation of the Greek term <span class="greek">ψυχή</span> (<span class="translit">psuchē</span>) presents a particularly difficult problem in this verse. Most English versions since the KJV have translated the term “life.” This preserves the paradox of finding one’s “life” (in the sense of earthly life) while at the same time really losing it (in the sense of “soul” or transcendent inner life) and vice versa, but at the same time it obscures the wordplay that results from the same Greek word having multiple meanings. To translate as “soul,” however, gives the modern English reader the impression of the immortal soul at the expense of the earthly life. On the whole it is probably best to use the translation “life” and retain the paradox at the expense of the wordplay.</p></p>
<p id="n4100857"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100857">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek word translated <i>life</i> can refer to both earthly, physical life and inner, transcendent life (one’s “soul”). In the context, if a person is not willing to suffer the world’s rejection and persecution in order to follow Jesus but instead seeks to retain his physical life, then that person will <i>lose</i> both physical life and inner, transcendent life (at the judgment). On the other hand, the one who willingly gives up earthly, physical life to follow Jesus (“loses his life because of me and because of the gospel”) will ultimately <i>find</i> one’s “soul” (note that the parallel in John’s Gospel speaks of “guarding one’s ‘soul’ for eternal life” (John 12:25).</p></p>
<p id="n4100858"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100858">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for my sake and for the gospel.” The traditional rendering “for my sake” can be understood in the sense of “for my benefit,” but the Greek term <span class="greek">ἕνεκα</span> (<i>heneka</i>) indicates the cause or reason for something (BDAG 334 s.v. 1). Here the phrase “because of” was repeated before “the gospel” for clarity and for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4100859"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100859">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a man,” but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used in a generic sense here to refer to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n4100860"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100860">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “yet” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4100861"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100861">61</a> <p><b>sn</b> How one responds now to Jesus and his teaching is a reflection of how Jesus, as the Son of Man who judges, will respond then in the final judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n410091"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n410091">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n410092"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n410092">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek negative here (<span class="greek">οὐ μή</span>, <span class="translit">ou mē</span>) is the strongest possible.</p></p>
<p id="n410093"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n410093">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will not taste.” Here the Greek verb does not mean “sample a small amount” (as a typical English reader might infer from the word “taste”), but “experience something cognitively or emotionally; come to know something” (cf. BDAG 195 s.v. <span class="greek">γεύομαι</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n410094"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n410094">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> Several suggestions have been made as to the referent for the phrase <i>the kingdom of God come with power</i>: (1) the transfiguration itself, which immediately follows in the narrative; (2) Jesus’ resurrection and ascension; (3) the coming of the Spirit and the inauguration of the kingdom in the present age; (4) Jesus’ second coming and the final establishment of the kingdom. The reference to <i>after six days</i> in 9:2 seems to some interpreters to indicate that Mark had the transfiguration in mind insofar as it was a substantial prefiguring of the consummation of the kingdom. As such, the transfiguration would have been a tremendous confirmation to the disciples that even though Jesus had just finished speaking of his death (8:31; 9:31; 10:33), he was nonetheless the promised Messiah and things were proceeding according to God’s plan. The major problem with this interpretation is that <i>some standing here…will not experience death</i> seems to suggest that some of the hearers would die before the arrival of the kingdom, yet there is no indication any of Jesus’ hearers died in the six days between the statement here and the transfiguration. This suggests either the coming of the Spirit as the inauguration of the kingdom or the second coming with the ultimate establishment of the kingdom are more likely referents. </p></p>
<p id="n410095"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n410095">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after six days.”</p></p>
<p id="n410096"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n410096">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> In 1st century Judaism and in the NT, there was the belief that the righteous get new, glorified bodies in order to enter heaven (1 Cor 15:42-49; 2 Cor 5:1-10). This transformation means the righteous will share the glory of God. One recalls the way Moses shared the Lord’s glory after his visit to the mountain in Exod 34. So the disciples saw Jesus <i>transfigured</i>, and they were getting a sneak preview of the great glory that Jesus would have (only his glory is more inherent to him as one who shares in the rule of the kingdom).</p></p>
<p id="n410097"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n410097">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> Commentators and scholars discuss why <i>Moses</i> and <i>Elijah</i> are present. The most likely explanation is that Moses represents the prophetic office (Acts 3:18-22) and Elijah pictures the presence of the last days (Mal 4:5-6), the prophet of the eschaton (the end times).</p></p>
<p id="n410098"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n410098">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410099"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n410099">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, Peter said to Jesus.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> (<span class="translit">apokritheis</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4100910"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “dwellings,” “booths” (referring to the temporary booths constructed in the celebration of the feast of Tabernacles).</p><p><b>sn</b> Peter apparently wanted to celebrate the feast of Tabernacles or Booths that looked forward to the end and wanted to treat Moses, Elijah, and Jesus as equals by making <i>three shelters</i> (one for each). It was actually a way of expressing honor to Jesus, but the next few verses make it clear that it was not enough honor.</p></p>
<p id="n4100911"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100911">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4100912"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100912">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100913"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100913">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>cloud</i> is the cloud of God’s presence and the voice is his as well.</p></p>
<p id="n4100914"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100914">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And there came a cloud, surrounding them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100915"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100915">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my beloved Son,” or “my Son, the beloved [one].” The force of <span class="greek">ἀγαπητός</span> (<span class="translit">agapētos</span>) is often “pertaining to one who is the only one of his or her class, but at the same time is particularly loved and cherished” (L&amp;N 58.53; cf. also BDAG 7 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4100916"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100916">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>listen to him</i> comes from Deut 18:15 and makes two points: 1) Jesus is a prophet like Moses, a leader-prophet, and 2) they have much yet to learn from him.</p></p>
<p id="n4100917"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100918"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100918">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they were asking him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4100919"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Why do the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4100920"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100920">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4100921"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100921">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> The participle <span class="greek">προστρέχοντες</span> (<span class="translit">prostrechontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb to make the sequence of events clear in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4100922"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100922">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4100923"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100923">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to do so” are not in the Greek text, but have been supplied for clarity and stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4100924"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100924">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, he said to them.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> (<span class="translit">apokritheis</span>) is redundant, but the phrasing of the sentence was modified slightly to make it clearer in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4100925"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100925">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O.” The marker of direct address, <span class="greek">ὦ</span> (<span class="translit">ō</span>), is functionally equivalent to a vocative and is represented in the translation by “you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100926"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100926">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faithless.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The rebuke for lack of faith has OT roots: Num 14:27; Deut 32:5, 20; Isa 59:8.</p></p>
<p id="n4100927"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100927">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “how long.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100928"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100928">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “put up with.” See Num 11:12; Isa 46:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4100929"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100929">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> The pronouns <i>you…you</i> are plural, indicating that Jesus is speaking to a group rather than an individual.</p></p>
<p id="n4100930"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100930">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100931"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100931">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4100932"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100932">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100933"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100933">33</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A C<sup>3</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have <span class="greek">τὸ εἰ δύνασαι πιστεῦσαι</span> (<span class="translit">to ei dunasai pisteusai</span>, “if you are able to believe”), instead of <span class="greek">τὸ εἰ δύνῃ</span> (<span class="translit">to ei dunē</span>, “if you are able”; supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C* L N* <span class="greek">Δ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 579 892). Others have <span class="greek">εἰ δύνῃ</span> (or <span class="greek">δυνάσαι</span>) <span class="greek">πιστεῦσαι</span> (“if you are able to believe”; so D K <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 28 565 <i>al</i>), while still others have <span class="greek">τοῦτο εἰ δύνῃ</span> (<span class="translit">touto ei dunē</span>, “if you can [do] this”; so [<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45</sup>] W). The reading that best explains the rise of the others is <span class="greek">τὸ εἰ δύνῃ</span>. The neuter article indicates that the Lord is now quoting the boy’s father who, in v. 22, says <span class="greek">εἴ τι δύνῃ</span> (<span class="translit">ei ti dunē</span>, “if you are able to do anything”). The article is thus used anaphorically (see <i>ExSyn</i> 238). However, scribes could easily have overlooked this idiom and would consequently read <span class="greek">τὸ εἰ δύνῃ</span> as the protasis of a conditional clause of the Lord’s statement. As such, it would almost demand the infinitive <span class="greek">πιστεῦσαι</span>, producing the reading <span class="greek">τὸ εἰ δύνασαι πιστεῦσαι</span> (“if you are able to believe, all things are possible…”). But the article here seems to be meaningless, prompting other scribes to modify the text still further. Some dropped the nonsensical article, while others turned it into the demonstrative <span class="greek">τοῦτο</span> and dropped the infinitive. It is clear that scribes had difficulty with the initial text here, and made adjustments in various directions. What might not be so clear is the exact genealogy of the descent of all the readings. However, <span class="greek">τὸ εἰ δύνῃ</span> is both a hard saying, best explains the rise of the other readings, and is supported by the best witnesses. It thus rightly deserves to be considered authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n4100934"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100934">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “commanded” (often with the implication of a threat, L&amp;N 33.331).</p></p>
<p id="n4100935"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100935">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Unclean spirit</i> refers to an evil spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n4100936"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100936">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the boy) has been specified in the translation for clarity. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4100937"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100937">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100938"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100938">38</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses, even early and excellent ones (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>45vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A C D L W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat co), have “and fasting” (<span class="greek">καὶ νηστείᾳ</span>, <span class="translit">kai nēsteia</span>) after “prayer” here. But this seems to be a motivated reading, due to the early church’s emphasis on fasting (<i>TCGNT</i> 85; cf., e.g., <i>2 Clem</i>. 16:4; Pol. <i>Phil</i> 7:2; <i>Did</i>. 1:3; 7:4). That the most significant witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B), as well as a few others (0274 k), lack <span class="greek">καὶ νηστείᾳ</span>, when a good reason for the omission is difficult to find, argues strongly for the shorter reading.</p></p>
<p id="n4100939"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100939">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4100940"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100940">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100941"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100941">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>) is considered by some to be used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women (cf. NRSV, “into human hands”; CEV, “to people”). However, because this can be taken as a specific reference to the group responsible for Jesus’ arrest, where it is unlikely women were present (cf. Matt 26:47-56; Mark 14:43-52; Luke 22:47-53; John 18:2-12), the word “men” has been retained in the translation. There may also be a slight wordplay with “the Son of Man” earlier in the verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4100942"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100942">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4100943"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100943">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They will kill him, and being killed, after…” The redundancy in the statement has been removed in the translation. </p></p>
<p id="n4100944"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100944">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They will kill him and after three days he will rise</i>. See the note at the end of Mark 8:30 regarding the passion predictions.</p></p>
<p id="n4100945"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100945">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4100946"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100946">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Capernaum</i> was a town located on the northwest shore of the Sea of Galilee, 680 ft (204 m) below sea level. It existed since Hasmonean times and was a major trade and economic center in the North Galilean region. The population in the first century is estimated to be around 1,500. Capernaum became the hub of operations for Jesus’ Galilean ministry (Matt 4:13; Mark 2:1). In modern times the site was discovered in 1838 by the American explorer E. Robinson, and major excavations began in 1905 by German archaeologists H. Kohl and C. Watzinger. Not until 1968, however, were remains from the time of Jesus visible; in that year V. Corbo and S. Loffreda began a series of annual archaeological campaigns that lasted until 1985. This work uncovered what is thought to be the house of Simon Peter as well as ruins of the first century synagogue beneath the later synagogue from the fourth or fifth century A.D. Today gently rolling hills and date palms frame the first century site, a favorite tourist destination of visitors to the Galilee.</p></p>
<p id="n4100947"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100947">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4100948"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100948">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb, <span class="greek">δέχομαι</span> (<span class="translit">dechomai</span>), is a term of hospitality (L&amp;N 34.53).</p></p>
<p id="n4100949"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100949">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Children</i> were very insignificant in ancient culture, so this child would be the perfect object lesson to counter the disciples’ selfish ambitions.</p></p>
<p id="n4100950"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100950">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100951"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100951">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in [the] name that of Christ you are.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100952"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100952">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bear the Messiah’s”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 8:29.</p></p>
<p id="n4100953"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100953">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the millstone of a donkey.” This refers to a large flat stone turned by a donkey in the process of grinding grain (BDAG 661 s.v. <span class="greek">μύλος</span> 2; L&amp;N 7.68-69). The same term is used in the parallel account in Matt 18:6.</p><p><b>sn</b> The punishment of drowning with a heavy weight attached is extremely gruesome and reflects Jesus’ views concerning those who cause others who believe in him to sin.</p></p>
<p id="n4100954"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100954">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “than having.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100955"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100955">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> The word translated <i>hell</i> is “Gehenna” (<span class="greek">γέεννα</span>, <span class="translit">geenna</span>), a Greek transliteration of the Hebrew words <i>ge hinnom</i> (“Valley of Hinnom”). This was the valley along the south side of Jerusalem. In OT times it was used for human sacrifices to the pagan god Molech (cf. Jer 7:31; 19:5-6; 32:35), and it came to be used as a place where human excrement and rubbish were disposed of and burned. In the intertestamental period, it came to be used symbolically as the place of divine punishment (cf. <i>1 En</i>. 27:2; 90:26; <i>4 Ezra</i> 7:36). This Greek term also occurs in vv. 45, 47.</p></p>
<p id="n4100956"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100956">56</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have <b>9:44</b> here and <b>9:46</b> after v. 45: “where their worm never dies and the fire is never quenched” (identical with v. 48). Verses 44 and 46 are present in A D <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy<sup>p,h</sup>, but lacking in significant Alexandrian <span class="smcaps">mss</span> and several others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C L W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0274 ƒ<sup>1</sup> 28 565 892 co). This appears to be a scribal addition from v. 48 and is almost certainly not an original part of the Greek text of Mark. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n4100957"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100957">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “than having.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100958"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100958">58</a> <p><b>tc</b> See <b>tc</b> note at the end of v. 43.</p></p>
<p id="n4100959"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100959">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “throw it out.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100960"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100960">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4100961"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100961">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “than having.”</p></p>
<p id="n4100962"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100962">62</a> <p><b>tc</b> The earliest <span class="smcaps">mss</span> ([<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>] B L [W] <span class="greek">Δ</span> 0274 ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 28* 565 700 sy<sup>s</sup> sa) have the reading adopted by the translation. Codex Bezae (D) and several Itala read “Every sacrifice will be salted with salt.” The majority of other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A C <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy<sup>p,h</sup>) have both readings, “Everyone will be salted with fire, and every sacrifice will be salted with salt.” An early scribe may have written the LXX text of Lev 2:13 (“Every sacrifice offering of yours shall be salted with salt”) in the margin of his ms. At a later stage, copyists would either replace the text with this marginal note or add the note to the text. The longer reading thus seems to be the result of the conflation of the Alexandrian reading “salted with fire” and the Western reading “salted with salt.” The reading adopted by the text enjoys the best support and explains the other readings in the ms tradition. </p><p><b>sn</b> The statement <i>everyone will be salted with fire</i> is difficult to interpret. It may be a reference to (1) unbelievers who enter hell as punishment for rejection of Jesus, indicating that just as salt preserves so they will be preserved in their punishment in hell forever; (2) Christians who experience suffering in this world because of their attachment to Christ; (3) any person who experiences suffering in a way appropriate to their relationship to Jesus. For believers this means the suffering of purification, and for unbelievers it means hell, i.e., eternal torment. </p></p>
<p id="n4100963"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100963">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Salt</i> was used as seasoning or fertilizer (BDAG 41 s.v. <span class="greek">ἅλας</span> a), or as a preservative. If salt ceased to be useful, it was thrown away. With this illustration Jesus warned about a disciple who ceased to follow him.</p></p>
<p id="n4100964"><a href="file1007.xhtml#n4100964">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> The difficulty of this saying is understanding how <i>salt</i> could lose <i>its saltiness</i> since its chemical properties cannot change. It is thus often assumed that Jesus was referring to chemically impure salt, perhaps a natural salt which, when exposed to the elements, had all the genuine salt leached out, leaving only the sediment or impurities behind. Others have suggested the background of the saying is the use of salt blocks by Arab bakers to line the floor of their ovens: Under the intense heat these blocks would eventually crystallize and undergo a change in chemical composition, finally being thrown out as unserviceable. A saying in the Talmud (<i>b. Bekhorot</i> 8b) attributed to R. Joshua ben Chananja (ca. <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 90), recounts how when he was asked the question “When salt loses its flavor, how can it be made salty again?” is said to have replied, “By salting it with the afterbirth of a mule.” He was then asked, “Then does the mule (being sterile) bear young?” to which he replied: “Can salt lose its flavor?” The point appears to be both are impossible. The saying, while admittedly late, suggests that culturally the loss of flavor by salt was regarded as an impossibility. Genuine salt can never lose its flavor. In this case the saying by Jesus here may be similar to Matt 19:24, where it is likewise impossible for the camel to go through the eye of a sewing needle.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
