<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Hebrews 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">God’s Promised Rest</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> Therefore we must be wary<sup><a id="n580041" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n580041">1</a></sup> that, while the promise of entering his rest remains open, none of you may seem to have come short of it. <span class="verse">4:2</span> For we had good news proclaimed to us just as they did. But the message they heard did them no good, since they did not join in<sup><a id="n580042" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n580042">2</a></sup> with those who heard it in faith.<sup><a id="n580043" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n580043">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:3</span> For we who have believed enter that rest, as he has said, “<i><b>As I swore in my anger</b></i>, ‘<b><i>They will never enter my rest!</i></b>’”<sup><a id="n580044" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n580044">4</a></sup> And yet God’s works<sup><a id="n580045" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n580045">5</a></sup> were accomplished from the foundation of the world. <span class="verse">4:4</span> For he has spoken somewhere about the seventh day in this way: “<b><i>And God rested on the seventh day from all his works</i></b>,”<sup><a id="n580046" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n580046">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:5</span> but to repeat the text cited earlier:<sup><a id="n580047" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n580047">7</a></sup> “<b><i>They will never enter my rest!</i></b>” <span class="verse">4:6</span> Therefore it remains for some to enter it, yet those to whom it was previously proclaimed did not enter because of disobedience. <span class="verse">4:7</span> So God<sup><a id="n580048" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n580048">8</a></sup> again ordains a certain day, “Today,” speaking through David<sup><a id="n580049" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n580049">9</a></sup> after so long a time, as in the words quoted before,<sup><a id="n5800410" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n5800410">10</a></sup> “<i><b>Oh, that today you would listen as he speaks!</b></i><sup><a id="n5800411" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n5800411">11</a></sup> <b><i>Do not harden your hearts</i></b>.” <span class="verse">4:8</span> For if Joshua had given them rest, God<sup><a id="n5800412" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n5800412">12</a></sup> would not have spoken afterward about another day. <span class="verse">4:9</span> Consequently a Sabbath rest remains for the people of God. <span class="verse">4:10</span> For the one who enters God’s<sup><a id="n5800413" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n5800413">13</a></sup> rest has also rested from his works, just as God did from his own works. <span class="verse">4:11</span> Thus we must make every effort to enter that rest, so that no one may fall by following the same pattern of disobedience. <span class="verse">4:12</span> For the word of God is living and active and sharper than any double-edged sword, piercing even to the point of dividing soul from spirit, and joints from marrow; it is able to judge the desires and thoughts of the heart. <span class="verse">4:13</span> And no creature is hidden from God,<sup><a id="n5800414" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n5800414">14</a></sup> but everything is naked and exposed to the eyes of him to whom we must render an account. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Jesus Our Compassionate High Priest</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:14</span> Therefore since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast to our confession. <span class="verse">4:15</span> For we do not have a high priest incapable of sympathizing with our weaknesses, but one who has been tempted in every way just as we are, yet without sin. <span class="verse">4:16</span> Therefore let us confidently approach the throne of grace to receive mercy and find grace whenever we need help.<sup><a id="n5800415" href="file1195_notes.xhtml#n5800415">15</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>