<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 15</h2>
<p id="n440151"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n440151">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, they came down <i>from Judea</i> to Antioch in Syria.</p></p>
<p id="n440152"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n440152">2</a> <p><b>tc</b> Codex Bezae (D) and a few other witnesses have “and walk” here (i.e., instead of <span class="greek">τῷ ἔθει τῷ Μωϋσέως</span> [<span class="translit">tō ethei tō Mōu>seōs</span>] they read <span class="greek">καὶ τῷ ἔθει τῷ Μωϋσέως περιπατῆτε</span> [<span class="translit">kai tō ethei tō Mōu>seōs peripatēte</span>]). This is a decidedly stronger focus on obedience to the Law. As well, D expands vv. 1-5 in various places with the overall effect of being “more sympathetic to the local tradition of the church at Jerusalem” while the Alexandrian witnesses are more sympathetic to Paul (<i>TCGNT</i> 377). Codex D is well known for having a significantly longer text in Acts, but modern scholarship is generally of the opinion that the text of D expands on the original wording of Acts, with a theological viewpoint that especially puts Peter in a more authoritarian light. The expansion in these five verses is in keeping with that motif even though Peter is not explicitly in view.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Unless you are circumcised</i>. These teachers from Judea were teaching that Gentiles could not be saved unless they kept the law of Moses in regard to circumcision. Thus according to them a Gentile had first to become a proselyte to Judaism, including circumcision, before one could become a Christian. This party is sometimes known (collectively) as Judaizers. They did not question that Gentiles could come into the community, but disagreed with Paul and Barnabas on what basis they could do so.</p></p>
<p id="n440153"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n440153">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “no little argument and debate” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n440154"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n440154">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the church, or the rest of the believers at Antioch) has been specified to avoid confusion with the Judaizers mentioned in the preceding clause.</p></p>
<p id="n440155"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n440155">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “go up to,” but in this context a meeting is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n440157"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n440157">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “point of controversy.” It is unclear whether this event parallels Gal 2:1-10 or that Gal 2 fits with Acts 11:30. More than likely Gal 2:1-10 is to be related to Acts 11:30.</p></p>
<p id="n440158"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n440158">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Phoenicia</i> was an area along the Mediterranean coast north of Palestine in ancient Syria.</p></p>
<p id="n440159"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n440159">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 33.201 indicates that <span class="greek">ἐκδιηγέομαι</span> (<span class="translit">ekdiēgeomai</span>) means to provide detailed information in a systematic manner, “to inform, to relate, to tell fully.” “Relating at length” conveys this effectively in the present context.</p></p>
<p id="n4401510"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> For <span class="greek">ἐποίουν</span> (<span class="translit">epoioun</span>) in this verse BDAG 839 s.v. <span class="greek">ποιέω</span> 2.c has “<i>they brought joy to the members</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401511"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 761 s.v. <span class="greek">παραδέχομαι</span> 2 has “<i>receive, accept</i>” for the meaning here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401512"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “announced.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401513"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> “They reported all the things God had done with them”—an identical phrase occurs in Acts 14:27. God is always the agent.</p></p>
<p id="n4401514"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401514">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisee</i> in 5:34.</p></p>
<p id="n4401515"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401515">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Greek word used here (<span class="greek">δεῖ</span>, <span class="translit">dei</span>) is a strong term that expresses divine necessity. The claim is that God commanded the circumcision of Gentiles.</p></p>
<p id="n4401516"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “them”; the referent (the Gentiles) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401517"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “keep.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401518"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation for <span class="greek">ἰδεῖν</span> (<span class="translit">idein</span>) in this verse is given by BDAG 279-80 s.v. <span class="greek">εἶδον</span> 3 as “<i>deliberate concerning this matter</i>.” A contemporary idiom would be to “look into” a matter.</p></p>
<p id="n4401519"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “discussion.” This term is repeated from v. 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4401520"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “long ago” (an idiom, literally “from ancient days”). According to L&amp;N 67.26, “this reference to Peter having been chosen by God sometime before to bring the gospel to the Gentiles can hardly be regarded as a reference to ancient times, though some persons understand this to mean that God’s decision was made at the beginning of time. The usage of <span class="greek">ἀφ᾿ ἡμερῶν ἀρχαίων</span> is probably designed to emphasize the established nature of God’s decision for Peter to take the gospel to the Gentiles beginning with the centurion Cornelius. The fact that this was relatively early in the development of the church may also serve to explain the use of the idiom.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401521"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401521">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>God chose</i>. The theme of God’s sovereign choice is an important point, because 1st century Jews believed Israel’s unique position and customs were a reflection of God’s choice.</p></p>
<p id="n4401522"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “word.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401523"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of the good news.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401524"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “God chose among you from my mouth the Gentiles to hear the message of the gospel and to believe.” The sense of this sentence in Greek is difficult to render in English. The Greek verb <span class="greek">ἐκλέγομαι</span> (<span class="translit">eklegomai</span>, “choose”) normally takes a person or thing as a direct object; in this verse the verb has neither clearly stated. The translation understands the phrase “from my mouth,” referring to Peter, as a description of both who God chose and the task to be done. This coupled with the following statement about Gentiles hearing the message of the gospel leads to the more dynamic rendering in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4401525"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401525">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>who knows the heart</i> means “who knows what people think.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401526"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “has borne witness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401527"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401527">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>By giving them…just as he did to us</i>. The allusion is to the events of Acts 10-11, esp. 10:44-48 and Peter’s remarks in 11:15-18.</p></p>
<p id="n4401528"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 231 s.v. <span class="greek">διακρίνω</span> 1.b lists this passage under the meaning “to conclude that there is a difference, <i>make a distinction, differentiate</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401529"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “purifying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401530"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to BDAG 793 s.v. <span class="greek">πειράζω</span> 2.c, “In Ac 15:10 the <span class="greek">πειράζειν τὸν θεόν</span> consists in the fact that after God’s will has been clearly made known through granting of the Spirit to the Gentiles (v. 8), some doubt and make trial to see whether God’s will really becomes operative.” All testing of God in Luke is negative: Luke 4:2; 11:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4401531"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401531">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>yoke</i> is a wooden bar or frame that joins two animals like oxen or horses so that they can pull a wagon, plow, etc. together. Here it is used figuratively of the restriction that some in the early church wanted to place on Gentile converts to Christianity of observing the law of Moses and having males circumcised. The <i>yoke</i> is a decidedly negative image: Matt 23:4, but cf. Matt 11:29-30.</p></p>
<p id="n4401532"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401533"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “by.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401534"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401534">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Jesus, just as they are.” BDAG 1016-17 s.v. <span class="greek">τρόπος</span> 1 translates <span class="greek">καθ᾿ ὃν τρόπον</span> (<span class="translit">kath</span>’<span class="translit"> hon tropon</span>) here as “<i>in the same way as</i>.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>In the same way as they are</i>. Here is an interesting reversal of the argument. Jews are saved by grace (without law), as Gentiles are.</p></p>
<p id="n4401535"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 922 s.v. <span class="greek">σιγάω</span> 1.a lists this passage under the meaning “<i>say nothing, keep still, keep silent</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401536"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401536">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here in connection with <span class="greek">τέρατα</span> (<span class="translit">terata</span>) the miraculous nature of these signs is indicated.</p></p>
<p id="n4401537"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 922 s.v. <span class="greek">σιγάω</span> 1.b lists this passage under the meaning “<i>stop speaking, become silent</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401538"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered, saying”; the redundant participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4401539"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401539">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Simeon</i> is a form of the apostle Peter’s Aramaic name. James uses Peter’s “Jewish” name here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401540"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401540">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “reported,” “described.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401541"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401541">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 378 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπισκέπτομαι</span> 3 translates this phrase in Acts 15:14, “<i>God concerned himself about winning a people fr. among the nations</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401542"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401542">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to take,” but in the sense of selecting or choosing (accompanied by the preposition <span class="greek">ἐκ</span> [<span class="translit">ek</span>] plus a genitive specifying the group selected from) see Heb 5:1; also BDAG 584 s.v. <span class="greek">λαμβάνω</span> 6.</p></p>
<p id="n4401543"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401543">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> In the Greek text the expression “from among the Gentiles” is in emphatic position.</p></p>
<p id="n4401544"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401544">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401545"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401545">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>agree</i> means “match” or “harmonize with.” James’ point in the introduction argues that many of the OT prophets taught this. He gives one example (which follows).</p></p>
<p id="n4401546"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401546">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “After these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401547"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401547">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> The first person pronoun <i>I</i> refers to God and his activity. It is God who is doing this.</p></p>
<p id="n4401548"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401548">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or more generally, “dwelling”; perhaps, “royal tent.” According to BDAG 928 s.v. <span class="greek">σκηνή</span> the word can mean “<i>tent</i>” or “<i>hut</i>,” or more generally “<i>lodging</i>” or “<i>dwelling</i>.” In this verse (a quotation from Amos 9:11) BDAG refers this to David’s ruined kingdom; it is possibly an allusion to a king’s tent (a royal tent). God is at work to reestablish David’s line (Acts 2:30-36; 13:32-39).</p></p>
<p id="n4401549"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401549">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 86 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνορθόω</span> places this verb under the meaning “to build someth. up again after it has fallen, <i>rebuild, restore</i>,” but since <span class="greek">ἀνοικοδομέω</span> (<span class="translit">anoikodomeō</span>, “rebuild”) has occurred twice in this verse already, “restore” is used here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401550"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401550">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “so that all other people.” The use of this term follows Amos 9:11 LXX.</p></p>
<p id="n4401551"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401551">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) introduces an explanatory clause that explains the preceding phrase “the rest of humanity.” The clause introduced by <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) could also be punctuated in English as a parenthesis.</p></p>
<p id="n4401552"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401552">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “all the nations” (in Greek the word for “nation” and “Gentile” is the same). </p><p><b>sn</b> Note the linkage back to v. 14 through the mention of <i>Gentiles</i>. What Simeon explained is what the OT text says would happen.</p></p>
<p id="n4401553"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401553">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all the Gentiles on whom my name has been called.” Based on well-attested OT usage, the passive of <span class="greek">ἐπικαλέω</span> (<span class="translit">epikaleō</span>) here indicates God’s ownership (“all the Gentiles who belong to me”) or calling (“all the Gentiles whom I have called to be my own”). See L&amp;N 11.28.</p></p>
<p id="n4401554"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401554">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Amos 9:11-12 LXX. James demonstrated a high degree of cultural sensitivity when he cited a version of the text (the Septuagint, the Greek translation of the Old Testament) that Gentiles would use.</p></p>
<p id="n4401555"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401555">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Who makes these things known</i>. The remark emphasizes how God’s design of these things reaches back to the time he declared them.</p></p>
<p id="n4401556"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401556">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 45:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4401557"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401557">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I have decided,” “I think.” The verb <span class="greek">κρίνω</span> (<span class="translit">krinō</span>) has a far broader range of meaning than the often-used English verb “judge.” BDAG 568 s.v. <span class="greek">κρίνω</span> 3 places this use in Acts 15:19 in the category “<i>judge, think, consider, look upon</i>” followed by double accusative of object and predicate. However, many modern translations give the impression that a binding decision is being handed down by James: “it is my judgment” (NASB, NIV); “I have reached the decision” (NRSV). L&amp;N 22.25, on the other hand, translate the phrase here “I think that we should not cause extra difficulty for those among the Gentiles.” This gives more the impression of an opinion than a binding decision. The resolution of this lies not so much in the lexical data as in how one conceives James’ role in the leadership of the Jerusalem church, plus the dynamics of the specific situation where the issue of Gentile inclusion in the church was being discussed. The major possibilities are: (1) James is handing down a binding decision to the rest of the church as the one who has ultimate authority to decide this matter; (2) James is offering his own personal opinion in the matter, which is not binding on the church; (3) James is voicing a consensus opinion of all the apostles and elders, although phrasing it as if it were his own; (4) James is making a suggestion to the rest of the leadership as to what course they should follow. In light of the difficulty in reconstructing the historical situation in detail, it is best to use a translation which maintains as many of the various options as possible. For this reason the translation “Therefore I conclude” has been used, leaving open the question whether in reaching this conclusion James is speaking only for himself or for the rest of the leadership.</p></p>
<p id="n4401558"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401558">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “trouble.” This term is a NT <i>hapax legomenon</i> (BDAG 775 s.v. <span class="greek">παρενοχλέω</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401559"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401559">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “among the nations” (in Greek the word for “nation” and “Gentile” is the same).</p></p>
<p id="n4401560"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401560">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “to write a letter, to send a letter to” for <span class="greek">ἐπιστέλλω</span> (<span class="translit">epistellō</span>) is given in L&amp;N 33.49.</p></p>
<p id="n4401561"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401561">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Three of the four prohibitions deal with food (the first, third and fourth) while one prohibition deals with behavior (the second, refraining from sexual immorality). Since these occur in the order they do, the translation “abstain from” is used to cover both sorts of activity (eating food items, immoral behavior). </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Telling them to abstain</i>. These restrictions are not on matters of salvation, but are given as acts of sensitivity to their Jewish brethren, as v. 21 makes clear. Another example of such sensitivity is seen in 1 Cor 10:14-11:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4401562"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401562">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “polluted.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401563"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401563">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>What has been strangled</i>. That is, to refrain from eating animals that had been killed without having the blood drained from them. According to the Mosaic law (Lev 17:13-14), Jews were forbidden to eat flesh with the blood still in it (note the following provision in Acts 15:20, <i>and from blood</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401564"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401564">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from generations of old”; the translation “<i>fr. ancient times</i>” is given by BDAG 192 s.v. <span class="greek">γενεά</span> 3.b.</p></p>
<p id="n4401565"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401565">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “read aloud” is used to indicate the actual practice; translating as “read” could be misunderstood to mean private, silent reading.</p></p>
<p id="n4401566"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401566">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4401567"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401567">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 255 s.v. <span class="greek">δοκέω</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">β</span> lists this verse under the meaning “<i>it seems best to me, I decide, I resolve</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401568"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401568">68</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Silas</i>. See 2 Cor 1:19; 1 Thess 1:1; 2 Thess 1:1 (= Silvanus).</p></p>
<p id="n4401569"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401569">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Antioch</i> was a city in Syria (not Antioch in Pisidia).</p></p>
<p id="n4401570"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401570">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “writing by their hand” (an idiom for sending a letter).</p></p>
<p id="n4401571"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401571">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The apostles.” The word “from” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n4401572"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401572">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but “your” is supplied to specify the relationship, since without it “brothers” could be understood as vocative in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4401573"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401573">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the brothers who are from the Gentiles.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401574"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401574">74</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Antioch</i> was a city in Syria (not Antioch in Pisidia).</p></p>
<p id="n4401575"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401575">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and Syria,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4401576"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401576">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here BDAG 990-91 s.v. <span class="greek">ταράσσω</span> 2 states, “Of mental confusion caused by false teachings <span class="greek">ταρ</span>.<span class="greek"> τινά</span> Ac 15:24 (w. <span class="greek">λόγοις</span> foll.).”</p></p>
<p id="n4401577"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401577">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 71 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνασκευάζω</span> describes this verb with a figurative meaning: “to cause inward distress, <i>upset, unsettle</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401578"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401578">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “souls.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401579"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401579">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by words”; L&amp;N 25.231 translates the phrase “they troubled and upset you by what they said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401580"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401580">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having become of one mind, we have decided.” This has been translated “we have unanimously decided” to reduce the awkwardness in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4401581"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401581">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 255 s.v. <span class="greek">δοκέω</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">β</span> lists this verse under the meaning “<i>it seems best to me, I decide, I resolve</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401582"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401582">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men who,” but this can be misleading because in English the referent could be understood to be the men sent along with Barnabas and Paul rather than Barnabas and Paul themselves. This option does not exist in the Greek original, however, since <span class="greek">ἀνθρώποις</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpois</span>) is dative and must agree with “Barnabas and Paul,” while <span class="greek">ἄνδρας</span> (<span class="translit">andras</span>) is accusative. By omitting the word “men” from the translation here, it is clear in English that the phrase refers to the immediately preceding nouns “Barnabas and Paul.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401583"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401583">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who have risked their souls”; the equivalent English idiom is “risk one’s life.” The descriptions commend Barnabas and Paul as thoroughly trustworthy.</p></p>
<p id="n4401584"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401584">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401585"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401585">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb has been translated as an epistolary aorist.</p></p>
<p id="n4401586"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401586">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Judas and Silas</i> were the “two witnesses” who would vouch for the truth of the recommendation.</p></p>
<p id="n4401587"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401587">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by means of word” (an idiom for a verbal report).</p></p>
<p id="n4401588"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401588">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is the same expression translated “decided” in Acts 15:22, 25. BDAG 255 s.v. <span class="greek">δοκέω</span> 2.b.<span class="greek">β</span> lists “<i>decide</i>” as a possible gloss for this verse, and this translation would be consistent with the translation of the same expression in Acts 15:22, 25. However, the unusually awkward “the Holy Spirit and we have decided” would result. Given this approach, it would be more natural in English to say “We and the Holy Spirit have decided,” but changing the order removes the emphasis the Greek text gives to the Holy Spirit. Thus, although the similarity to the phrases in 15:22, 25 is obscured, it is better to use the alternate translation “<i>it seems best to me</i>” (also given by BDAG): “it seemed best to the Holy Spirit and to us.” Again the scope of agreement is highlighted.</p></p>
<p id="n4401589"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401589">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 71.39 translates “indispensable (rules)” while BDAG 358 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπάναγκες</span> has “<i>the necessary things</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401590"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401590">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is no specific semantic component in the Greek word <span class="greek">εἰδωλόθυτος</span> that means “meat” (see BDAG 280 s.v. <span class="greek">εἰδωλόθυτος</span>; L&amp;N 5.15). The stem—<span class="greek">θυτος</span> means “sacrifice” (referring to an animal sacrificially killed) and thereby implies meat.</p></p>
<p id="n4401591"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401591">91</a> <p><b>tc</b> Codex Bezae (D) and a few other witnesses lack the restriction “and from what has been strangled” (<span class="greek">καὶ πνικτῶν</span>, <span class="translit">kai pniktōn</span>), though the words are supported by a wide variety of early and significant witnesses otherwise and should be considered authentic.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>What has been strangled</i>. That is, to refrain from eating animals that had been killed without having the blood drained from them. According to the Mosaic law (Lev 17:13-14), Jews were forbidden to eat flesh with the blood still in it (note the preceding provision in this verse, <i>and from blood</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401592"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401592">92</a> <p><b>tc</b> Codex Bezae (D) as well as 323 614 945 1739 1891 sa and other witnesses have after “sexual immorality” the following statement: “And whatever you do not want to happen to yourselves, do not do to another/others.” By adding this negative form of the Golden Rule, these witnesses effectively change the Apostolic Decree from what might be regarded as ceremonial restrictions into more ethical demands. The issues here are quite complicated, and beyond the scope of this brief note. Suffice it to say that D and its allies here are almost surely an expansion and alteration of the original text of Acts. For an excellent discussion of the exegetical and textual issues, see <i>TCGNT</i> 379-83.</p></p>
<p id="n4401593"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401593">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from which things keeping yourselves.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (<span class="greek">ὧν</span>, <span class="translit">|ōn</span>) has been replaced by a pronoun (“these things”) and a new English sentence begun. The participle <span class="greek">διατηροῦντες</span> (<span class="translit">diatērountes</span>) has been translated as a conditional adverbial participle (“if you keep yourselves”). See further L&amp;N 13.153.</p></p>
<p id="n4401594"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401594">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase <span class="greek">ἔρρωσθε</span> (<span class="translit">errōsthe</span>) may be understood as a stock device indicating a letter is complete (“goodbye,” L&amp;N 33.24) or as a sincere wish that the persons involved may fare well (“may you fare well,” L&amp;N 23.133).</p></p>
<p id="n4401595"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401595">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “sent away.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401596"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401596">96</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Antioch</i> was a city in Syria (not Antioch in Pisidia).</p></p>
<p id="n4401597"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401597">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “congregation” (referring to the group of believers).</p></p>
<p id="n4401598"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401598">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “read it.” The translation “read aloud” is used to indicate the actual practice of public reading; translating as “read” could be misunderstood to mean private, silent, or individual reading.</p></p>
<p id="n4401599"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n4401599">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the people) is specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44015100"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “at its encouraging message.”</p></p>
<p id="n44015101"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">λόγου</span> (<span class="translit">logou</span>) is singular. BDAG 599-600 s.v. <span class="greek">λόγος</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">β</span> has “<i>in a long speech</i>” for this phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n44015102"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n44015103"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “there” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n44015104"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015104">104</a> <p><b>tc</b> A few <span class="smcaps">mss</span> add <b>15:34</b> “But Silas decided to stay there.” Verse 34 is lacking in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span> bo. It is included in a shorter form, with a few minor variations, by (C) 33 36 323 453 614 (945) 1175 1739 1891 <i>al</i> sa, and in a longer form (“But Silas decided to stay with them, and only Judas departed”) by D l. The verse is almost certainly not a part of the original text of Acts, but was added to harmonize with the statement about Silas in v. 40. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n44015105"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015105">105</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Antioch</i> was a city in Syria (not Antioch in Pisidia).</p></p>
<p id="n44015106"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015106">106</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n44015107"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The word of the Lord</i> is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; Luke 22:61, Acts 11:16, 1 Pet 1:25) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; here and in v. 36; Acts 8:25; 13:44, 48, 49; 16:32; 19:10, 20; 1 Thess 1:8; 4:15; 2 Thess 3:1). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said.</p></p>
<p id="n44015108"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Returning let us visit.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιστρέψαντες</span> (<span class="translit">epistrepsantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44015109"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the phrase “word of the Lord” in v. 35.</p></p>
<p id="n44015110"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 422 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔχω</span> 10.b has “<i>how they are</i>” for this phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n44015111"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 94 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀξιόω</span> 2.a has “<i>he insisted</i> (impf.) <i>that they should not take him along</i>” for this phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n44015112"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015112">112</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Pamphylia</i> was a province in the southern part of Asia Minor. See Acts 13:13, where it was mentioned previously.</p></p>
<p id="n44015113"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “There happened a sharp disagreement.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n44015114"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 780 s.v. <span class="greek">παροξυσμός</span> 2 has “<i>sharp disagreement</i>” here; L&amp;N 33.451 has “sharp argument, sharp difference of opinion.”</p></p>
<p id="n44015115"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “taking along Mark sailed.” The participle <span class="greek">παραλαβόντα</span> (<span class="translit">paralabonta</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44015116"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015116">116</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cyprus</i> is a large island in the Mediterranean off the south coast of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n44015117"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “committed.” BDAG 762 s.v. <span class="greek">παραδίδωμι</span> 2 gives “<i>be commended by someone to the grace of the Lord</i>” as the meaning for this phrase, although “<i>give over</i>” and “<i>commit</i>” are listed as alternatives for this category.</p></p>
<p id="n44015118"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by the brothers.” Here it it is highly probable that the entire congregation is in view, not just men, so the translation “brothers and sisters” has been used for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφῶν</span> (<span class="translit">adelphōn</span>),.</p></p>
<p id="n44015119"><a href="file1077.xhtml#n44015119">119</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Strengthening</i>. See Acts 14:22; 15:32; 18:23.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
