<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Titus 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Titus<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Conduct Consistent with Sound Teaching</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> But as for you, communicate the behavior that goes with<sup><a id="n560021" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n560021">1</a></sup> sound teaching. <span class="verse">2:2</span> Older men are to be temperate, dignified, self-controlled,<sup><a id="n560022" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n560022">2</a></sup> sound in faith, in love, and in endurance.<sup><a id="n560023" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n560023">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:3</span> Older women likewise are to exhibit behavior fitting for those who are holy, not slandering, not slaves to excessive drinking, but teaching what is good. <span class="verse">2:4</span> In this way<sup><a id="n560024" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n560024">4</a></sup> they will train<sup><a id="n560025" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n560025">5</a></sup> the younger women to love their husbands, to love their children, <span class="verse">2:5</span> to be self-controlled,<sup><a id="n560026" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n560026">6</a></sup> pure, fulfilling their duties at home,<sup><a id="n560027" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n560027">7</a></sup> kind, being subject to their own husbands, so that the message<sup><a id="n560028" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n560028">8</a></sup> of God may not be discredited.<sup><a id="n560029" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n560029">9</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:6</span> Encourage younger men likewise to be self-controlled,<sup><a id="n5600210" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600210">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:7</span> showing yourself to be an example of good works in every way. In your teaching show integrity, dignity, <span class="verse">2:8</span> and a sound message that cannot be criticized, so that any opponent will be at a loss,<sup><a id="n5600211" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600211">11</a></sup> because he has nothing evil to say about us. <span class="verse">2:9</span> Slaves<sup><a id="n5600212" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600212">12</a></sup> are to be subject to their own masters in everything,<sup><a id="n5600213" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600213">13</a></sup> to do what is wanted and not talk back, <span class="verse">2:10</span> not pilfering, but showing all good faith,<sup><a id="n5600214" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600214">14</a></sup> in order to bring credit to<sup><a id="n5600215" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600215">15</a></sup> the teaching of God our Savior in everything. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:11</span> For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all people.<sup><a id="n5600216" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600216">16</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:12</span> It trains us<sup><a id="n5600217" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600217">17</a></sup> to reject godless ways<sup><a id="n5600218" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600218">18</a></sup> and worldly desires and to live self-controlled, upright, and godly lives in the present age, <span class="verse">2:13</span> as we wait for the happy fulfillment of our hope in the glorious appearing<sup><a id="n5600219" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600219">19</a></sup> of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ.<sup><a id="n5600220" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600220">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:14</span> He<sup><a id="n5600221" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600221">21</a></sup> gave himself for us to set us free from every kind of lawlessness and to purify for himself a people who are truly his,<sup><a id="n5600222" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600222">22</a></sup> who are eager to do good.<sup><a id="n5600223" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600223">23</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:15</span> So communicate these things with the sort of exhortation or rebuke<sup><a id="n5600224" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600224">24</a></sup> that carries full authority.<sup><a id="n5600225" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600225">25</a></sup> Don’t let anyone look down<sup><a id="n5600226" href="file1187_notes.xhtml#n5600226">26</a></sup> on you. </p>

</body>
</html>