<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Mark 5</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Mark<br />Chapter 5</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Healing of a Demoniac </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:1</span> So<sup><a id="n410051" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n410051">1</a></sup> they came to the other side of the lake, to the region of the Gerasenes.<sup><a id="n410052" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n410052">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:2</span> Just as Jesus<sup><a id="n410053" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n410053">3</a></sup> was getting out of the boat,<sup><a id="n410054" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n410054">4</a></sup> a man with an unclean spirit<sup><a id="n410055" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n410055">5</a></sup> came from the tombs and met him.<sup><a id="n410056" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n410056">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:3</span> He lived among the tombs, and no one could bind him anymore, not even with a chain. <span class="verse">5:4</span> For his hands and feet had often been bound with chains and shackles,<sup><a id="n410057" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n410057">7</a></sup> but<sup><a id="n410058" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n410058">8</a></sup> he had torn the chains apart and broken the shackles in pieces. No one was strong enough to subdue him. <span class="verse">5:5</span> Each night and every day among the tombs and in the mountains, he would cry out and cut himself with stones. <span class="verse">5:6</span> When he saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and bowed down before him. <span class="verse">5:7</span> Then<sup><a id="n410059" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n410059">9</a></sup> he cried out with a loud voice, “Leave me alone,<sup><a id="n4100510" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100510">10</a></sup> Jesus, Son of the Most High God! I implore you by God<sup><a id="n4100511" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100511">11</a></sup> —do not torment me!” <span class="verse">5:8</span> (For Jesus<sup><a id="n4100512" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100512">12</a></sup> had said to him, “Come out of that man, you unclean spirit!”)<sup><a id="n4100513" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100513">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:9</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100514" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100514">14</a></sup> asked him, “What is your name?” And he said, “My name is Legion,<sup><a id="n4100515" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100515">15</a></sup> for we are many.” <span class="verse">5:10</span> He begged Jesus<sup><a id="n4100516" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100516">16</a></sup> repeatedly not to send them out of the region. <span class="verse">5:11</span> There on the hillside,<sup><a id="n4100517" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100517">17</a></sup> a great herd of pigs was feeding. <span class="verse">5:12</span> And the demonic spirits<sup><a id="n4100518" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100518">18</a></sup> begged him, “Send us into the pigs. Let us enter them.” <span class="verse">5:13</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100519" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100519">19</a></sup> gave them permission.<sup><a id="n4100520" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100520">20</a></sup> So<sup><a id="n4100521" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100521">21</a></sup> the unclean spirits came out and went into the pigs. Then the<sup></sup> herd rushed down the steep slope into the lake, and about 2,000 were drowned in the lake. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:14</span> Now<sup><a id="n4100522" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100522">22</a></sup> the herdsmen ran off and spread the news in the town and countryside, and the people went out to see what had happened. <span class="verse">5:15</span> They came to Jesus and saw the demon-possessed man sitting there, clothed and in his right mind—the one who had the “Legion”—and they were afraid. <span class="verse">5:16</span> Those who had seen what had happened to the demon-possessed man reported it, and they also told about the pigs. <span class="verse">5:17</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100523" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100523">23</a></sup> they began to beg Jesus<sup><a id="n4100524" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100524">24</a></sup> to leave their region. <span class="verse">5:18</span> As he was getting into the boat the man who had been demon-possessed asked if he could go<sup><a id="n4100525" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100525">25</a></sup> with him. <span class="verse">5:19</span> But<sup><a id="n4100526" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100526">26</a></sup> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100527" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100527">27</a></sup> did not permit him to do so. Instead, he said to him, “Go to your home and to your people and tell them what the Lord has done for you,<sup><a id="n4100528" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100528">28</a></sup> that he had mercy on you.” <span class="verse">5:20</span> So<sup><a id="n4100529" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100529">29</a></sup> he went away and began to proclaim in the Decapolis<sup><a id="n4100530" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100530">30</a></sup> what Jesus had done for him,<sup><a id="n4100531" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100531">31</a></sup> and all were amazed. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Restoration and Healing </p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:21</span> When Jesus had crossed again in a boat<sup><a id="n4100532" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100532">32</a></sup> to the other side, a large crowd gathered around him, and he was by the sea. <span class="verse">5:22</span> Then<sup><a id="n4100533" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100533">33</a></sup> one of the synagogue leaders,<sup><a id="n4100534" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100534">34</a></sup> named Jairus,<sup><a id="n4100535" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100535">35</a></sup> came up, and when he saw Jesus,<sup><a id="n4100536" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100536">36</a></sup> he fell at his feet. <span class="verse">5:23</span> He asked him urgently, “My little daughter is near death. Come and lay your hands on her so that she may be healed and live.” <span class="verse">5:24</span> Jesus<sup><a id="n4100537" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100537">37</a></sup> went with him, and a large crowd followed and pressed around him. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:25</span> Now<sup><a id="n4100538" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100538">38</a></sup> a woman was there who had been suffering from a hemorrhage<sup><a id="n4100539" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100539">39</a></sup> for twelve years.<sup><a id="n4100540" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100540">40</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:26</span> She had endured a great deal under the care of many doctors and had spent all that she had. Yet instead of getting better, she grew worse. <span class="verse">5:27</span> When she heard about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak,<sup><a id="n4100541" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100541">41</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:28</span> for she kept saying,<sup><a id="n4100542" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100542">42</a></sup> “If only I touch his clothes, I will be healed.”<sup><a id="n4100543" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100543">43</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:29</span> At once the bleeding stopped,<sup><a id="n4100544" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100544">44</a></sup> and she felt in her body that she was healed of her disease. <span class="verse">5:30</span> Jesus knew at once that power had gone out from him. He turned around in the crowd and said, “Who touched my clothes?” <span class="verse">5:31</span> His disciples said to him, “You see the crowd pressing against you and you say, ‘Who touched me?’” <span class="verse">5:32</span> But<sup><a id="n4100545" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100545">45</a></sup> he looked around to see who had done it. <span class="verse">5:33</span> Then the woman, with fear and trembling, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell down before him and told him the whole truth. <span class="verse">5:34</span> He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has made you well.<sup><a id="n4100546" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100546">46</a></sup> Go in peace, and be healed of your disease.” </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">5:35</span> While he was still speaking, people came from the synagogue leader’s<sup><a id="n4100547" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100547">47</a></sup> house saying, “Your daughter has died. Why trouble the teacher any longer?” <span class="verse">5:36</span> But Jesus, paying no attention to what was said, told the synagogue leader, “Do not be afraid; just believe.” <span class="verse">5:37</span> He did not let anyone follow him except Peter, James,<sup><a id="n4100548" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100548">48</a></sup> and John, the brother of James. <span class="verse">5:38</span> They came to the house of the synagogue leader where<sup><a id="n4100549" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100549">49</a></sup> he saw noisy confusion and people weeping and wailing loudly.<sup><a id="n4100550" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100550">50</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:39</span> When he entered he said to them, “Why are you distressed and weeping? The child is not dead but asleep!” <span class="verse">5:40</span> And they began making fun of him.<sup><a id="n4100551" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100551">51</a></sup> But he forced them all outside,<sup><a id="n4100552" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100552">52</a></sup> and he took the child’s father and mother and his own companions<sup><a id="n4100553" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100553">53</a></sup> and went into the room where the child was.<sup><a id="n4100554" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100554">54</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:41</span> Then, gently taking the child by the hand, he said to her, “<i>Talitha koum</i>,” which means, “Little girl, I say to you, get up.” <span class="verse">5:42</span> The girl got up at once and began to walk around (she was twelve years old). They were completely astonished at this.<sup><a id="n4100555" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100555">55</a></sup> <span class="verse">5:43</span> He strictly ordered that no one should know about this,<sup><a id="n4100556" href="file1003_notes.xhtml#n4100556">56</a></sup> and told them to give her something to eat. </p>

</body>
</html>