<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 22</h2>
<p id="n440221"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n440221">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Listen to my defense</i>. This is the first of several speeches Paul would make in his own defense: Acts 24:10ff.; 25:8, 16; and 26:1ff. For the use of such a speech (“apologia”) in Greek, see Josephus, <i>Ag. Ap</i>. 2.15 [2.147]; Wis 6:10.</p></p>
<p id="n440222"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n440222">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The adverb <span class="greek">νυνί</span> (<span class="translit">nuni</span>, “now”) is connected with the phrase <span class="greek">τῆς πρὸς ὑμᾶς νυνὶ ἀπολογίας</span> (<span class="translit">tēs pros humas nuni apologias</span>) rather than the verb <span class="greek">ἀκούσατε</span> (<span class="translit">akousate</span>), and the entire construction (prepositional phrase plus adverb) is in first attributive position and thus translated into English by a relative clause.</p></p>
<p id="n440223"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n440223">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <span class="greek">ἀκούσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">akousantes</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n440224"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n440224">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “spoke out to.” L&amp;N 33.27 has “to address an audience, with possible emphasis upon loudness—‘to address, to speak out to.’ <span class="greek">πολλῆς δέ σιγῆς γενομένης προσεφώνησεν τῇ ᾿Εβραίδι διαλέκτῳ</span> ‘when they were quiet, he addressed them in Hebrew’ Ac 21:40.”</p></p>
<p id="n440225"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n440225">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the Hebrew language.” See the note on “Aramaic” in 21:40.</p></p>
<p id="n440226"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n440226">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 613-14 s.v. <span class="greek">μᾶλλον</span> 1 “Abs. <span class="greek">μ</span>. can mean <i>to a greater degree (than before)</i>, <i>even more, now more than ever</i> Lk 5:15; Jn 5:18; 19:8; Ac 5:14; 22:2; 2 Cor 7:7.”</p></p>
<p id="n440227"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n440227">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 440 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡσυχία</span> 2 has “<span class="greek">παρέχειν ἡσυχίαν</span> <i>quiet down, give a hearing</i>…Ac 22:2.”</p><p><b>sn</b> This is best taken as a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n440228"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n440228">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and.” Since this represents a continuation of the speech begun in v. 1, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the logical sequence.</p></p>
<p id="n440229"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n440229">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a Jewish man.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402210"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 74 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνατρέφω</span> b has “of mental and spiritual nurture <i>bring up, rear, train</i>…<span class="greek">ἀνατεθραμμένος ἐν τ</span>.<span class="greek"> πόλει ταύτῃ</span> 22:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402211"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with precision.” Although often translated “strictly” this can be misunderstood for “solely” in English. BDAG 39 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀκρίβεια</span> gives the meaning as “<i>exactness, precision</i>.” To avoid the potential misunderstanding the translation “with strictness” is used, although it is slightly more awkward than “strictly.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402212"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “strictly at the feet of” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4402213"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “brought up in this city under Gamaliel, educated with strictness…” The phrase <span class="greek">παρὰ τοὺς πόδας Γαμαλιὴλ</span> (<span class="translit">para tous podas Gamaliēl</span>) could be understood with what precedes or with what follows. The punctuation of NA<sup>28</sup> and UBS<sup>5</sup>, which place a comma after <span class="greek">ταύτῃ</span> (<span class="translit">tautē</span>), has been followed in the translation.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Gamaliel</i> was a famous Jewish scholar and teacher mentioned here and in Acts 5:34. He had a grandson of the same name and is referred to as “Gamaliel the Elder” to avoid confusion. He is quoted a number of times in the Mishnah, was given the highest possible title for Jewish teachers, <i>Rabba</i> (cf. John 20:16), and was highly regarded in later rabbinic tradition.</p></p>
<p id="n4402214"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “our forefathers.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402215"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “ancestors, being.” The participle <span class="greek">ὑπάρχων</span> (<span class="translit">huparchōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402216"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 427 s.v. <span class="greek">ζηλωτής</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">α</span> has “of pers.…<span class="greek">ζ</span>.<span class="greek"> τοῦ θεοῦ</span> <i>one who is loyal to God</i> Ac 22:3.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402217"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“who”) was translated by the first person pronoun (“I”) and a new sentence begun in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402218"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402218">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, persecuted the Christian movement (Christianity). The <i>Way</i> is also used as a description of the Christian faith in Acts 9:2; 18:25-26; 19:9, 23; 24:14, 22).</p></p>
<p id="n4402219"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 442-43 s.v. <span class="greek">θάνατος</span> 1.a has “<span class="greek">διώκειν ἄχρι θανάτου</span> <i>persecute even to death</i> Ac 22:4.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402220"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “binding.” See Acts 8:3.</p></p>
<p id="n4402221"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 762 s.v. <span class="greek">παραδίδωμι</span> 1.b has “W. local <span class="greek">εἰς</span>…<span class="greek">εἰς φυλακήν</span> <i>put in prison</i> Ac 8:3; cp. 22:4.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402222"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, the whole Sanhedrin. BDAG 861 s.v. <span class="greek">πρεσβυτέριον</span> has “an administrative group concerned with the interests of a specific community, <i>council of elders</i>—a. of the highest Judean council in Jerusalem, in our lit. usu. called <span class="greek">συνέδριον</span>…<span class="greek">ὁ ἀρχιερεύς καὶ πᾶν τὸ πρ</span>. Ac 22:5.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402223"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from whom.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, the relative pronoun (“whom”) was translated by the third person plural pronoun (“them”) and a new sentence begun in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4402224"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “receiving.” The participle <span class="greek">δεξάμενος</span> (<span class="translit">dexamenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402225"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “letters to the brothers, [and] I was going to Damascus.” Such a translation, however, might be confusing since the term “brother” is frequently used of a fellow <i>Christian</i>. In this context, Paul is speaking about fellow Jews. </p></p>
<p id="n4402226"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “even there and bring…” or “there and even bring…” The ascensive <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) shows that Paul was fervent in his zeal against Christians, but it is difficult to translate for it really belongs with the entire idea of arresting and bringing back the prisoners.</p></p>
<p id="n4402227"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 221 s.v. <span class="greek">δέω</span> 1.b has “<span class="greek">δεδεμένον ἄγειν τινά</span> <i>bring someone as prisoner</i>…Ac 9:2, 21; 22:5.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402228"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I was going…to bring even those who were there to Jerusalem as prisoners that they might be punished.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402229"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened that as.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402230"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “going and nearing Damascus.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>En route and near Damascus</i>. This is the first retelling of Paul’s Damascus Road experience in Acts (cf. Acts 9:1-9; the second retelling is in Acts 26:9-20).</p></p>
<p id="n4402231"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402231">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 472 s.v. <span class="greek">ἱκανός</span> 3.b has “<span class="greek">φῶς</span> <i>a very bright light</i> Ac 22:6.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402232"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “from the sky” (the same Greek word means both “heaven” and “sky”).</p></p>
<p id="n4402233"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “shone.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402234"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a continuation of the same sentence in Greek using the connective <span class="greek">τέ</span> (<span class="translit">te</span>), but due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence a new sentence was begun in the translation here. To indicate the logical sequence for the modern English reader, <span class="greek">τέ</span> was translated as “then.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402235"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “did not hear” (but see Acts 9:7). BDAG 38 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀκούω</span> 7 has “W. acc. <span class="greek">τὸν νόμον</span> <i>understand the law</i> Gal 4:21; perh. Ac 22:9; 26:14…belong here.” If the word has this sense here, then a metonymy is present, since the lack of effect is put for a failure to appreciate what was heard.</p></p>
<p id="n4402236"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So I said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402237"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Getting up.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναστάς</span> (<span class="translit">anastas</span>) is an adverbial participle of attendant circumstance and has been translated as a finite verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4402238"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about all things.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402239"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “assigned,” “ordered.” BDAG 991 s.v. <span class="greek">τάσσω</span> 2.a has “act. and pass., foll. by acc. w. inf.…<span class="greek">περὶ πάντων ὧν τέτακταί σοι ποιῆσαι</span> <i>concerning everything that you have been ordered to do</i> 22:10.” There is an allusion to a divine call and commission here.</p></p>
<p id="n4402240"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402240">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 106 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀπό</span> 5.a has “<span class="greek">οὐκ ἐνέβλεπον ἀπὸ τῆς δόξης τοῦ φωτός</span> <i>I could not see because of the brilliance of the light</i> Ac 22:11.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402241"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402241">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “brightness”; <i>Grk</i> “glory.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402242"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402242">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by” (<span class="greek">ὑπό</span>, <span class="translit">hupo</span>), but this would be too awkward in English following the previous “by.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402243"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a certain Ananias.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402244"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402244">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The law</i> refers to the law of Moses.</p></p>
<p id="n4402245"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 534 s.v. <span class="greek">κατοικέω</span> 1.a translates this present participle “<span class="greek">ὑπὸ πάντων τῶν</span> (sc. <span class="greek">ἐκεῖ</span>) <span class="greek">κατοικούντων ᾿Ιουδαίων</span> <i>by all the Jews who live there</i> Ac 22:12.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402246"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “coming.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐλθών</span> (<span class="translit">elthōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402247"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402247">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “coming to me and standing beside [me] said to me.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιστάς</span> (<span class="translit">epistas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4402248"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Brother Saul, look up” (here an idiom for regaining one’s sight). BDAG 59 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναβλέπω</span> places this usage under 1, “<i>look up</i> Ac 22:13a. W. <span class="greek">εἰς αὐτόν</span> to show the direction of the glance…22:13b; but perh. this vs. belongs under 2a.” BDAG 59 s.v. 2.a.<span class="greek">α</span> states, “of blind persons, who were formerly able to see, <i>regain sight</i>.” The problem for the translator is deciding between the literal and the idiomatic usage and at the same time attempting to retain the wordplay in Acts 22:13: “[Ananias] said to me, ‘Look up!’ and at that very moment I looked up to him.” The assumption of the command is that the effort to look up will be worth it (through the regaining of sight).</p></p>
<p id="n4402249"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402249">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hour,” but <span class="greek">ὥρα</span> (<span class="translit">hōra</span>) is often used for indefinite short periods of time (so BDAG 1102-3 s.v. <span class="greek">ὥρα</span> 2.c: “<span class="greek">αὐτῇ τῇ ὥρᾳ</span> <i>at that very time, at once, instantly</i>…Lk 2:38; 24:33; Ac 16:18; 22:13”). A comparison with the account in Acts 9:18 indicates that this is clearly the meaning here.</p></p>
<p id="n4402250"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402250">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I looked up to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402251"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forefathers”; <i>Grk</i> “fathers.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>God of our ancestors</i> is a description of the God of Israel. The God of promise was at work again.</p></p>
<p id="n4402252"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402252">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 30.89 has “‘to choose in advance, to select beforehand, to designate in advance’…‘the God of our ancestors has already chosen you to know his will’ Ac 22:14.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402253"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402253">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and to see.” This <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4402254"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402254">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Righteous One</i> is a reference to Jesus Christ (Acts 3:14).</p></p>
<p id="n4402255"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402255">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a solemn declaration”; <i>Grk</i> “a voice.” BDAG 1071-72 s.v. <span class="greek">φωνή</span> 2.c states, “that which the voice gives expression to: <i>call, cry, outcry, loud</i> or <i>solemn declaration</i> (…= order, command)…Cp. 22:14; 24:21.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402256"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402256">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a witness to him.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>You will be his witness</i>. See Acts 1:8; 13:31. The following reference to <i>all people</i> stresses all nationalities (Eph 3:7-9; Acts 9:15). Note also v. 21.</p></p>
<p id="n4402257"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402257">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all men,” but this is a generic use of <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4402258"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402258">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 67.121 has “to extend time unduly, with the implication of lack of decision—‘to wait, to delay.’ <span class="greek">νῦν τί μέλλεις…ἀναστὰς βάπτισαι</span> ‘what are you waiting for? Get up and be baptized’ Ac 22:16.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402259"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402259">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “getting up.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀναστάς</span> (<span class="translit">anastas</span>) is an adverbial participle of attendant circumstance and has been translated as a finite verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4402260"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402260">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>expression have your sins washed away</i> means “have your sins purified” (the washing is figurative).</p></p>
<p id="n4402261"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402261">61</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>calling on his name</i> describes the confession of the believer: Acts 2:17-38, esp. v. 38; Rom 10:12-13; 1 Cor 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4402262"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402262">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened to me that.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4402263"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402263">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 309 s.v. <span class="greek">ἔκστασις</span> 2 has “<span class="greek">γενέσθαι ἐν ἐκστάσει</span> <i>fall into a trance</i> Ac 22:17.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402264"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402264">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Jesus”; <i>Grk</i> “him.” The referent (the Lord, cf. v. 19) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402265"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402265">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And I said.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, in <span class="greek">καγώ</span> [<span class="translit">kagō</span>]) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4402266"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402266">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> For the distributive sense of the expression <span class="greek">κατὰ τὰς συναγωγάς</span> (<span class="translit">kata tas sunagōgas</span>) BDAG 512 s.v. <span class="greek">κατά</span> B.1.d has “of places viewed serially, distributive use w. acc.…<span class="greek">κατ᾿ οἶκαν</span> <i>from house to house</i>…Ac 2:46b; 5:42…Likew. the pl.…<span class="greek">κ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὰς συναγωγάς</span> 22:19.” See also L&amp;N 37.114.</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4402267"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402267">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> Now Paul referred to Stephen as <i>your witness</i>, and he himself had also become a witness. The reversal was now complete; the opponent had now become a proponent.</p></p>
<p id="n4402268"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402268">68</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>When the blood of your witness Stephen was shed</i> means “when your witness Stephen was murdered.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402269"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402269">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and approving.” This <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4402270"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402270">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “outer garments.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The cloaks</i>. The outer garment, or cloak, was taken off and laid aside to leave the arms free (in this case for throwing stones).</p></p>
<p id="n4402271"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402271">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who were putting him to death.” For the translation of <span class="greek">ἀναιρούντων</span> (<span class="translit">anairountōn</span>) as “putting to death” see BDAG 64 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀναιρέω</span> 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4402272"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402272">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” Since this represents a response to Paul’s reply in v. 19, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the logical sequence.</p></p>
<p id="n4402273"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402273">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “They were listening”; the referent (the crowd) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402274"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402274">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “until this word.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Until he said this</i>. Note it is the mention of Paul’s mission to the Gentiles with its implication of ethnic openness that is so disturbing to the audience.</p></p>
<p id="n4402275"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402275">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And.” To indicate the logical sequence, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” here.</p></p>
<p id="n4402276"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402276">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402277"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402277">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “such a one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402278"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402278">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 491 s.v. <span class="greek">καθήκω</span> has “to be appropriate, <i>come/reach to, be proper/fitting</i>…Usu. impers. <span class="greek">καθήκει</span> <i>it comes (to someone)</i>…foll. by acc. and inf….<span class="greek">οὐ καθῆκεν αὐτὸν ζῆν</span> <i>he should not be allowed to live</i> Ac 22:22.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402279"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402279">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">κραυγαζόντων</span> (<span class="translit">kraugazontōn</span>) has been translated temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4402280"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402280">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “outer garments.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Their cloaks</i>. The outer garment, or cloak, was taken off and laid aside to leave the arms free (perhaps in this case as preparation for throwing stones).</p></p>
<p id="n4402281"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402281">81</a> <p><b>sn</b> The crowd’s act of <i>tossing dust in the air</i> indicated they had heard something disturbing and offensive. This may have been a symbolic gesture, indicating Paul’s words deserved to be thrown to the wind, or it may have simply resulted from the fact they had nothing else to throw at him at the moment.</p></p>
<p id="n4402282"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402282">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). In Greek the term <span class="greek">χιλίαρχος</span> (<span class="translit">chiliarchos</span>) literally described the “commander of a thousand,” but it was used as the standard translation for the Latin <i>tribunus militum</i> or <i>tribunus militare</i>, the military tribune who commanded a cohort of 600 men.</p></p>
<p id="n4402283"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402283">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402284"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402284">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the headquarters.” BDAG 775 s.v. <span class="greek">παρεμβολή</span> 2 has “<i>barracks/headquarters</i> of the Roman troops in Jerusalem Ac 21:34, 37; 22:24; 23:10, 16, 32.”</p></p>
<p id="n4402285"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402285">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “into the barracks, saying.” This is a continuation of the same sentence in Greek using the participle <span class="greek">εἴπας</span> (<span class="translit">eipas</span>), but due to the length and complexity of the Greek sentence a new sentence was begun in the translation here. The direct object “them” has been supplied; it is understood in Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n4402286"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402286">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402287"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402287">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To interrogate Paul by beating him with a lash</i>. Under the Roman legal system it was customary to use physical torture to extract confessions or other information from prisoners who were not Roman citizens and who were charged with various crimes, especially treason or sedition. The lashing would be done with a whip of leather thongs with pieces of metal or bone attached to the ends.</p></p>
<p id="n4402288"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402288">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the crowd) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402289"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402289">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402290"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402290">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for the thongs” (of which the lash was made). Although often translated as a dative of means (“with thongs”), referring to thongs used to tie the victim to the whipping post, BDAG 474-75 s.v. <span class="greek">ἱμάς</span> states that it “is better taken as a dat. of purpose <i>for the thongs</i>, in which case <span class="greek">οἱ ἱμάντες</span> = <i>whips</i> (Posidonius: 87 fgm. 5 Jac.; POxy. 1186, 2 <span class="greek">τὴν διὰ τῶν ἱμάντων αἰκείαν</span>.—Antiphanes 74, 8, Demosth. 19, 197 and Artem. 1, 70 use the sing. in this way).”</p></p>
<p id="n4402291"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402291">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402292"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402292">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “citizen” is supplied here for emphasis and clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4402293"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402293">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a Roman citizen and uncondemned.” BDAG 35 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀκατάκριτος</span> has “<i>uncondemned, without due process</i>” for this usage.</p><p><b>sn</b> The fact that Paul was a <i>Roman citizen</i> protected him from being tortured to extract information; such protections were guaranteed by the Porcian and Julian law codes. In addition, the fact Paul had not been tried exempted him from punishment.</p></p>
<p id="n4402294"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402294">94</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the word <i>centurion</i> in 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4402295"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402295">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “this” is not in the Greek text but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4402296"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402296">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 24.</p></p>
<p id="n4402297"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402297">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “it” is not in the Greek text but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4402298"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402298">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “What do you intend to do?” Although BDAG 627 s.v. <span class="greek">μέλλω</span> 1.c.<span class="greek">α</span> lists this phrase under the category “<i>be about to, be on the point of</i>,” it is possible it belongs under 1.c.<span class="greek">γ</span>, “denoting an intended action: <i>intend, propose, have in mind</i>…<span class="greek">τί μέλλεις ποιεῖν</span>; <i>what do you intend to do?</i>”</p></p>
<p id="n4402299"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n4402299">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “citizen” is supplied here for emphasis and clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44022100"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 24.</p></p>
<p id="n44022101"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and said to.”</p></p>
<p id="n44022102"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44022103"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “citizen” is supplied here for emphasis and clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44022104"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He said.”</p></p>
<p id="n44022105"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 24.</p></p>
<p id="n44022106"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022106">106</a> <p><b>sn</b> Sometimes Roman <i>citizenship</i> was purchased through a bribe (Dio Cassius, <i>Roman History</i> 60.17.4-9). That may well have been the case here.</p></p>
<p id="n44022107"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 495-96 s.v. <span class="greek">καί</span> 2.b has “intensive: <i>even</i>…Ac 5:39; 22:28.”</p></p>
<p id="n44022108"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “citizen” is supplied here for emphasis and clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> Paul’s reference to being <i>born a citizen</i> suggests he inherited his Roman citizenship from his family.</p></p>
<p id="n44022109"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul said.” This phrase has been placed at the end of the sentence in the translation for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n44022110"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 158 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀφίστημι</span> 2.b has “<i>keep away</i>…<span class="greek">ἀπό τινος…</span>Lk 4:13; Ac 5:38; 2 Cor 12:8…cp. Ac 22:29.” In context, the point would seem to be not that the interrogators departed or withdrew, but that they held back from continuing the flogging.</p></p>
<p id="n44022111"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the chiliarch” (an officer in command of a thousand soldiers). See note on the term “commanding officer” in v. 24.</p></p>
<p id="n44022112"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44022113"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a present tense (<span class="greek">ἐστιν</span>, <span class="translit">estin</span>) retained in indirect discourse. It must be translated as a past tense in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n44022114"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “citizen” is supplied here for emphasis and clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44022115"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022115">115</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Had him tied up</i>. Perhaps a reference to the chains in Acts 21:33, or the preparations for the lashing in Acts 22:25. A trial would now be needed to resolve the matter. The Roman authorities’ hesitation to render a judgment in the case occurs repeatedly: Acts 22:30; 23:28-29; 24:22; 25:20, 26-27. The legal process begun here would take the rest of Acts and will be unresolved at the end. The process itself took four years of Paul’s life.</p></p>
<p id="n44022116"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the commanding officer) has been supplied here in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44022117"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the certainty, why.” BDAG 147 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀσφαλής</span> 2 has “<span class="greek">τὸ ἀ</span>. <i>the certainty = the truth</i> (in ref. to ferreting out the facts…<span class="greek">ἵνα τὸ ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἐπιγνῶ</span>) <span class="greek">γνῶναι</span> 21:34; 22:30.”</p></p>
<p id="n44022118"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44022119"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the whole Sanhedrin” (the Sanhedrin was the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews).</p></p>
<p id="n44022120"><a href="file1084.xhtml#n44022120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and bringing.” The participle <span class="greek">καταγαγών</span> (<span class="translit">katagagōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was begun in the translation, and <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to clarify the logical sequence.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
