<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Mark 11</h2>
<p id="n410111"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n410111">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n410113"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n410113">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> The exact location of the village of <i>Bethphage</i> is not known. Most put it on the southeast side of the Mount of Olives and northwest of Bethany, about 1.5 miles (3 km) east of Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n410114"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n410114">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> “Mountain” in English generally denotes a higher elevation than it often does in reference to places in Palestine. The <i>Mount of Olives</i> is really a ridge running north to south about 3 kilometers (1.8 miles) long, east of Jerusalem across the Kidron Valley. Its central elevation is about 30 meters (100 ft) higher than Jerusalem. It was named for the large number of olive trees which grew on it.</p></p>
<p id="n410115"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n410115">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n410116"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n410116">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the village lying before you” (BDAG 530 s.v. <span class="greek">κατέναντι</span> 2.b).</p></p>
<p id="n410117"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n410117">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a colt tied there on which no one of men has ever sat.”</p></p>
<p id="n410118"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n410118">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> The custom called <i>angaria</i> allowed the impressment of animals for service to a significant figure.</p></p>
<p id="n410119"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n410119">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101110"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the people mentioned in v. 5) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101111"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101112"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101112">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “garments”; but this refers in context to their outer cloaks. The action is like 2 Kgs 9:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4101113"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101113">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Zech 9:9, a prophecy fulfilled here (cf. Matt 21:5; John 12:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4101114"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression <span class="greek">῾Ωσαννά</span> (<span class="translit">hōsanna</span>, literally in Hebrew, “O Lord, save”) in the quotation from Ps 118:25-26 was probably by this time a familiar liturgical expression of praise, on the order of “Hail to the king,” although both the underlying Aramaic and Hebrew expressions meant “O Lord, save us.” The introductory <span class="greek">ὡσαννά</span> is followed by the words of Ps 118:25, <span class="greek">εὐλογημένος ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἐν ὀνόματι κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">eulogēmenos ho erchomenos en onomati kuriou</span>), although in the Fourth Gospel the author adds for good measure <span class="greek">καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς τοῦ ᾿Ισραήλ</span> (<span class="translit">kai ho basileus tou Israēl</span>). In words familiar to every Jew, the author is indicating that at this point every messianic expectation is now at the point of realization. It is clear from the words of the psalm shouted by the crowd that Jesus is being proclaimed as messianic king. See E. Lohse, <i>TDNT</i> 9:682-84.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Hosanna</i> is an Aramaic expression that literally means, “help, I pray,” or “save, I pray.” By Jesus’ time it had become a strictly liturgical formula of praise, however, and was used as an exclamation of praise to God.</p></p>
<p id="n4101115"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101115">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 118:25-26.</p></p>
<p id="n4101116"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “Then” to indicate the transition from the previous narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101117"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101118"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4101119"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101119">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “anything.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101120"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101120">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And answering, he said to it.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθείς</span> (<span class="translit">apokritheis</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4101121"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101121">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Mark 11:12-14</i>. The incident of the cursing of the fig tree occurs before he enters the temple for a third time (11:27ff) and is questioned at length by the religious leaders (11:27-12:40). It appears that Mark records the incident as a portent of what is going to happen to the leadership in Jerusalem who were supposed to have borne spiritual fruit but have been found by Messiah at his coming to be barren. The fact that the nation as a whole is indicted is made explicit in chapter 13:1-37 where Jesus speaks of Jerusalem’s destruction and his second coming.</p></p>
<p id="n4101122"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101122">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101124"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101124">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101125"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101125">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The merchants (<i>those who were selling</i>) would have been located in the Court of the Gentiles.</p></p>
<p id="n4101126"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101126">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Matthew (21:12-27), Mark (here, 11:15-19), and Luke (19:45-46) record this incident of the temple cleansing at the end of Jesus’ ministry. John (2:13-16) records a cleansing of the temple at the beginning of Jesus’ ministry. See the note on the word <i>temple courts</i> in John 2:14 for a discussion of the relationship of these accounts to one another.</p></p>
<p id="n4101127"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101127">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “things.” The Greek word <span class="greek">σκεῦος</span> (<span class="translit">skeuos</span>) can refer to merchandise, property, goods, a vessel, or even generally “things” (but in the sense of some implement or tool). The idea here is almost certainly restricted to merchandise, rather than the more general “things,” although some suggest from the parallel with <i>m. Berakhot</i> 9.5 that Jesus was not even allowing sandals, staffs, or coin-purses to be carried through the court. The difficulty with this interpretation, however, is that it is fundamentally an appeal to Jewish oral <i>tradition</i> (something Jesus rarely sided with) as well as being indiscriminate toward all the worshipers.</p></p>
<p id="n4101128"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101128">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101129"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101129">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect <span class="greek">ἐδίδασκεν</span> (<span class="translit">edidasken</span>) is here taken ingressively.</p></p>
<p id="n4101130"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101130">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 56:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4101131"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101131">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a hideout” (see L&amp;N 1.57).</p></p>
<p id="n4101132"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101132">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Jer 7:11. The meaning of Jesus’ statement about making the temple courts <i>a den of robbers</i> probably operates here at two levels. Not only were the religious leaders robbing the people financially, but because of this they had also robbed them spiritually by stealing from them the opportunity to come to know God genuinely. It is possible that these merchants had recently been moved to this location for convenience.</p></p>
<p id="n4101133"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101133">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The chief priests and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4101134"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101134">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “how they could destroy him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101135"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101135">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referents (Jesus and his disciples) have been specified in the translation for clarity. Without such clarification there is room for considerable confusion here, since there are two prior sets of plural referents in the context, “the chief priests and experts in the law” and “the whole crowd” (both in v. 18). </p></p>
<p id="n4101136"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101136">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101137"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101137">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the Greek subjunctive mood, formally required in a subordinate clause introduced by <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>), is traditionally translated by an English subjunctive (e.g., “may,” so KJV, NAB, NIV, NRSV), changes in the use of the subjunctive in English now result in most readers understanding such a statement as indicating permission (“may” = “has permission to”) or as indicating uncertainty (“may” = “might” or “may or may not”). Thus a number of more recent translations render such instances by an English future tense (“will,” so TEV, CEV, NLT, NASB 1995 update). That approach has been followed here.</p></p>
<p id="n4101138"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101138">38</a> <p><b>tc</b> A number of significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> of various textual families (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 565 700 892 sa) do not include <b>11:26</b> “But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father in heaven forgive your sins.” The verse is included in most later <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A [C D] <span class="greek">Θ</span> [ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33] <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat) and is not likely to be original. It is probably an assimilation to Matt 6:15. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n4101140"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101140">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101141"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101141">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101142"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the chief priests, the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4101143"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this phrase, see BDAG 844 s.v. <span class="greek">ποῖος</span> 2.a.<span class="greek">γ</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4101144"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101144">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>) is probably used here (and in v. 32) in a generic sense, referring to both men and women (cf. NAB, NRSV, “of human origin”; TEV, “from human beings”; NLT, “merely human”).</p><p><b>sn</b> The question is whether John’s ministry was of divine or human origin.</p></p>
<p id="n4101145"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101146"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101146">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, they said to Jesus.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀποκριθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">apokrithentes</span>) is redundant, but the syntax of the phrase has been modified to conform to English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4101147"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101147">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> Very few questions could have so completely revealed the wicked intentions of the religious leaders. Jesus’ question revealed the motivation of the religious leaders and exposed them for what they really were—hypocrites. They indicted themselves when they cited only two options and chose neither of them (“<i>We do not know</i>”). The point of Mark 11:27-33 is that no matter what Jesus said in response to their question they were not going to believe it and would in the end use it against him. </p></p>
<p id="n4101148"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101148">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Neither will I tell you</i>. Though Jesus gave no answer, the analogy he used to their own question makes his view clear. His authority came from heaven.</p></p>
<p id="n4101149"><a href="file1009.xhtml#n4101149">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this phrase, see BDAG 844 s.v. <span class="greek">ποῖος</span> 2.a.<span class="greek">γ</span>. This is exactly the same phrase as in v. 28.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
