<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 7</h2>
<p id="n460071"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n460071">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It is good for a man not to touch a woman,” a euphemism for sexual relations. This idiom occurs ten times in Greek literature, and all of the references except one appear to refer to sexual relations (cf., e.g., Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 1.8.1 [1.163]; Gen 20:6 [LXX]; Prov 6:29 [LXX]). For discussion see G. D. Fee, <i>First Corinthians</i> (NICNT), 275. Many recent interpreters believe that here again (as in 6:12-13) Paul cites a slogan the Corinthians apparently used to justify their actions. If this is so, Paul agrees with the slogan in part, but corrects it in the following verses to show how the Corinthians misused the idea to justify abstinence within marriage (cf. 8:1, 4; 10:23). See also G. D. Fee, “1 Corinthians 7:1 in the NIV,” <i>JETS</i> 23 (1980): 307-14.</p></p>
<p id="n460072"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n460072">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Grk “each man should have his own wife.” “Have a wife” in this context means “have marital relations with” (see the following verse). The verb <span class="greek">ἐχέτω</span> (<span class="translit">echetō</span>, an imperatival form of <span class="greek">ἔχω</span>, [<span class="translit">echō</span>, “have”]) occurs twice in this verse, but has not been repeated in the translation for stylistic reasons. The idiom “have a wife” occurs 8 times in the LXX (Exod 2:1; Deut 28:30; 2 Chr 11:21; 1 Esd 9:12, 18; Tob 3:8; Isa 13:16; 54:1) with the meaning “have sexual relations with,” “be married,” or “be in continual sexual relations with,” and 10 times elsewhere in the NT with the same range of meaning (Matt 14:4; 22:28; Mark 6:18; 12:23; Luke 20:33, 28; John 4:18 [twice]; 1 Cor 5:1; 7:29). For discussion see G. D. Fee, <i>First Corinthians</i> (NICNT), 278; and G. D. Fee, “1 Corinthians 7:1 in the NIV,” <i>JETS</i> 23 (1980): 310-11.</p></p>
<p id="n460073"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n460073">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “should have.” For explanation of the translation, see the note on “have relations with” earlier in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n460074"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n460074">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fulfill the obligation” or “pay the debt,” referring to the fulfillment of sexual needs within marriage.</p></p>
<p id="n460075"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n460075">5</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most later witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy) add “fasting and” (<span class="greek">τῇ νηστείᾳ καί</span>, <span class="translit">tē nēsteia kai</span>) before “prayer.” But such an addition is motivated by ascetic concerns; further, its lack in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>11vid,46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B C D F G P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1739 1881 2464 <i>al</i> latt co argues decisively against its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n460076"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n460076">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and be together again.”</p></p>
<p id="n460077"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n460077">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “than to burn,” a figure of speech referring to unfulfilled sexual passion.</p></p>
<p id="n460078"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n460078">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Not I, but the Lord</i>. Here and in v. 12 Paul distinguishes between his own apostolic instruction and Jesus’ teaching during his earthly ministry. In vv. 10-11, Paul reports the Lord’s own teaching about divorce (cf. Mark 10:5-12).</p></p>
<p id="n460079"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n460079">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I, not the Lord</i>. Here and in v. 10 Paul distinguishes between his own apostolic instruction and Jesus’ teaching during his earthly ministry. In vv. 12-16, Paul deals with a situation about which the Lord gave no instruction in his earthly ministry.</p></p>
<p id="n4600710"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600710">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> <i>Grk</i> “the brother.” Later witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D<sup>2</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have <span class="greek">ἀνδρί</span> (<span class="translit">andri</span>, “husband”) here, apparently in conscious emulation of the earlier mention of <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>) in the verse. However, the earliest and best witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A B C D* F G P <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1739 <i>al</i> co) are decisively in favor of <span class="greek">ἀδελφῷ</span> (<span class="translit">adelphō</span>, “brother”), a word that because of the close association with “wife” here may have seemed inappropriate to many scribes. It is also for reasons of English style that “her husband” is used in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4600711"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600711">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> Interpreters differ over the implication of the statement <i>the brother or sister is not bound</i>. One view is that the believer is “not bound to continue the marriage,” i.e., not so slavishly tied to the instruction about not divorcing (cf. vv. 10-11) that he or she refuses to face reality when the unbelieving spouse is unwilling to continue the relationship. In this view divorce is allowable under these circumstances, but not remarriage (v. 11 still applies: remain unmarried or be reconciled). The other view is that the believer is “not bound in regard to marriage,” i.e., free to remain single or to remarry. The argument for this view is the conceptual parallel with vv. 39-40, where a wife is said to be “bound” (a different word in Greek, but the same concept) as long as her husband lives. But if the husband dies, she is “free” to marry as she wishes, only in the Lord. If the parallel holds, then <i>not bound</i> in v. 15 also means “free to marry another.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600712"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600712">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will save your husband?” The meaning is obviously that the wife would be the human agent in leading her husband to salvation.</p></p>
<p id="n4600713"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600713">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will save your wife?” The meaning is obviously that the husband would be the human agent in leading his wife to salvation.</p></p>
<p id="n4600714"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600714">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “only”; <i>Grk</i> “if not.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600715"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600715">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Let him not pull over the foreskin,” that is, attempt to reverse the appearance of circumcision by a surgical procedure. This was sometimes done by Hellenistic Jews to hide the embarrassment of circumcision (1 Macc 1:15; Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 12.5.1 [12.241]). Cf. BDAG 380 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπισπάω</span> 3.</p></p>
<p id="n4600716"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600716">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the calling.” “Calling” in Paul is God’s work of drawing people to faith in Christ. As in 1:26, calling here stands by metonymy for a person’s circumstances when he becomes a Christian.</p></p>
<p id="n4600717"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600717">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “servant” (KJV), though almost all modern translations render the word as “slave” here.</p></p>
<p id="n4600718"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600718">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4600719"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600719">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “virgins.” There are three main views as to which group of people is referred to by the word <span class="greek">παρθένος</span> (<span class="translit">parthenos</span>) here, and the stance taken here directly impacts one’s understanding of vv. 36-38. (1) The term could refer to virgin women who were not married. The central issue would then be whether or not their fathers should give them in marriage to eligible men. (This is the view which has been widely held throughout the history of the Church.) (2) A minority understand the term to refer to men and women who are married but who have chosen to live together without sexual relations. This position might have been possible in the Corinthian church, but there is no solid evidence to support it. (3) The view adopted by many modern commentators (see, e.g., Fee, Conzelmann, Barrett) is that the term refers to young, engaged women who were under the influence of various groups within the Corinthian church not to go through with their marriages. The central issue would then be whether the young men and women should continue with their plans and finalize their marriages. For further discussion, see G. D. Fee, <i>First Corinthians</i> (NICNT), 325-28.</p></p>
<p id="n4600720"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “should not seek a wife.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600721"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600721">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these will have tribulation in the flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600722"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600722">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I am trying to spare you.” Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context. “Such problems” has been supplied here to make the sense of the statement clear. </p></p>
<p id="n4600723"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600723">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4600724"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600724">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> In context the <i>unmarried woman</i> would probably refer specifically to a widow, who was no longer married, as opposed to the <i>virgin</i>, who had never been married.</p></p>
<p id="n4600725"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600725">25</a> <p><b>tc</b> There are three viable variant readings at this point in the text. (1) The reading <span class="greek">ἡ γυνὴ ἡ ἄγαμος καὶ ἡ παρθένος</span> (<span class="translit">hē gunē hē agamos kai hē parthenos</span>, “the unmarried woman and the virgin”) is represented by ancient and important <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, as well as some significant versions (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>15</sup> B 104 365 1505 vg co). (2) The reading <span class="greek">ἡ γυνὴ ἡ ἄγαμος καὶ ἡ παρθένος ἡ ἄγαμος</span> (“the unmarried woman and the unmarried virgin”) is also found in ancient and important <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A 33 1739 1881). (3) The reading <span class="greek">ἡ γυνὴ καὶ ἡ παρθένος ἡ ἄγαμος</span> (“the woman and the unmarried virgin”) is found in Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D F G) and the majority of Byzantine cursives. Based upon external evidence, the first and second readings are the strongest; the readings both reach deep into the second century with strong testimony from <span class="smcaps">mss</span> of the Alexandrian group of witnesses. Internal evidence seems equally balanced: Scribes may have wanted to add <span class="greek">ἡ ἄγαμος</span> to <span class="greek">παρθένος</span> for stylistic reasons, but they might also have wanted to remove it because it sounded redundant. Because Paul’s meaning is not quite clear, a decision on the proper textual reading is difficult. On the whole scribes tended to add to the text, not take from it. Thus the first reading should be favored as earlier, but this decision should be regarded as less than certain.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “The unmarried woman and the virgin.” The identity of the “virgin” here is a matter of interpretation (see note on “people who have never married” in v. 25 for discussion), which has in fact contributed to textual variation at this point in the text (see the text critical note above). As far as the translation is concerned, one must determine if one group of women or two are in view. It is possible that Paul means to refer to only one class of women here, namely unmarried virgins, but the use of the adjective <span class="greek">ἡ ἄγαμος</span> (<span class="translit">hē agamos</span>, “unmarried”) with “woman” and not “virgin” precludes that interpretation; in addition, the use of the article with both “woman” and “virgin” implies that two distinct groups are in view. If two groups are in view, English would more naturally use the conjunction “or” to indicate the distinction. Thus the translation “An unmarried woman or a virgin” has been used to make clear that two groups are in view.</p></p>
<p id="n4600726"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600726">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “virgin,” either a fiancée, a daughter, or the ward of a guardian. For discussion see the note at the end of v. 38.</p></p>
<p id="n4600727"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600727">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or referring to an engaged man: “if he is past the critical point,” “if his passions are too strong.” The word literally means “to be past the high point.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600728"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600728">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who gives his own virgin in marriage.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600729"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600729">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>1 Cor 7:36-38</i>. There are two common approaches to understanding the situation addressed in these verses. One view involves a father or male guardian deciding whether to give his daughter or female ward in marriage (cf. NASB, NIV margin). The evidence for this view is: (1) the phrase in v. 37 (<i>Grk</i>) “to keep his own virgin” fits this view well (“keep his own virgin [in his household]” rather than give her in marriage), but it does not fit the second view (there is little warrant for adding “her” in the way the second view translates it: “to keep <i>her</i> as a virgin”). (2) The verb used twice in v. 38 (<span class="greek">γαμίζω</span>, <span class="translit">gamizō</span>) normally means “to give in marriage” not “to get married.” The latter is usually expressed by <span class="greek">γαμέω</span> (<span class="translit">gameō</span>), as in v. 36b. (3) The father deciding what is best regarding his daughter’s marriage reflects the more likely cultural situation in ancient Corinth, though it does not fit modern Western customs. While Paul gives his advice in such a situation, he does not command that marriages be arranged in this way universally. If this view is taken, the translation will read as follows: “<b>7:36</b> If anyone thinks he is acting inappropriately toward his unmarried daughter, if she is past the bloom of youth and it seems necessary, he should do what he wishes; he does not sin. Let them marry. <b>7:37</b> But the man who is firm in his commitment, and is under no necessity but has control over his will, and has decided in his own mind to keep his daughter unmarried, does well. <b>7:38</b> So then the one who gives his daughter in marriage does well, but the one who does not give her does better.” The other view is taken by NRSV, NIV text, NJB, REB: a single man deciding whether to marry the woman to whom he is engaged. The evidence for this view is: (1) it seems odd to use the word “virgin” (vv. 36, 37, 38) if “daughter” or “ward” is intended. (2) The other view requires some difficult shifting of subjects in v. 36, whereas this view manages a more consistent subject for the various verbs used. (3) The phrases in these verses are used consistently elsewhere in this chapter to describe considerations appropriate to the engaged couple themselves (cf. vv. 9, 28, 39). It seems odd not to change the phrasing in speaking about a father or guardian. If this second view is taken, the translation will read as follows: “<b>7:36</b> If anyone thinks he is acting inappropriately toward his fiancée, if his passions are too strong and it seems necessary, he should do what he wishes; he does not sin. Let them marry. <b>7:37</b> But the man who is firm in his commitment, and is under no necessity but has control over his will, and has decided in his own mind to keep her as his fiancée, does well. <b>7:38</b> So then, the one who marries his fiancée does well, but the one who does not marry her does better.”</p></p>
<p id="n4600730"><a href="file1115.xhtml#n4600730">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">κοιμάω</span> (<span class="translit">koimaō</span>) literally means “sleep,” but it is often used in the Bible as a euphemism for the death of a believer.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
