<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Timothy 3</h2>
<p id="n540031"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n540031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the saying,” referring to the following citation (see 1 Tim 1:15; 4:9; 2 Tim 2:11; Titus 3:8 for other occurrences of this phrase).</p></p>
<p id="n540032"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n540032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “aspires to oversight.”</p></p>
<p id="n540033"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n540033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “bishop.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Although some see the article with <i>overseer</i> as indicating a single leader at the top of the ecclesiastical structure (thus taking the article as monadic), this is hardly necessary. It is naturally taken generically (referring to the <i>class</i> of leaders known as overseers) and, in fact, finds precedent in 2:11-12 (“a woman,” “a man”), 2:15 (“she”). </p></p>
<p id="n540034"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n540034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a man married only once,” “devoted solely to his wife” (see 1 Tim 3:12; 5:9; Titus 1:6). The meaning of this phrase is disputed. It is frequently understood to refer to the marital status of the church leader, excluding from leadership those who are (1) unmarried, (2) polygamous, (3) divorced, or (4) remarried after being widowed. A different interpretation is reflected in the NEB’s translation “faithful to his one wife.”</p></p>
<p id="n540035"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n540035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having children in submission with all dignity.” The last phrase, “keep his children in control without losing his dignity,” may refer to the children rather than the parent: “having children who are obedient and respectful.”</p></p>
<p id="n540036"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n540036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that he may not become arrogant.”</p></p>
<p id="n540037"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n540037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the judgment of the devil,” which could also mean “the judgment that the devil incurred.” But see 1 Tim 1:20 for examples of the danger Paul seems to have in mind.</p></p>
<p id="n540038"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n540038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “have a good reputation with”; <i>Grk</i> “have a good testimony from.”</p></p>
<p id="n540039"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n540039">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ones outside.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400310"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “be trapped like the devil was”; <i>Grk</i> “fall into the trap of the devil.” The parallel in 2 Tim 2:26 supports the rendering given in the text.</p></p>
<p id="n5400311"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “respectable, honorable, of serious demeanor.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400312"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “insincere,” “deceitful”; <i>Grk</i> “speaking double.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400313"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400313">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not devoted to much wine.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400314"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400314">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The mystery of the faith</i> is a reference to the revealed truths of the Christian faith.</p></p>
<p id="n5400315"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “also deaconesses.” The Greek word here is <span class="greek">γυναῖκας</span> (<span class="translit">gunaikas</span>) which literally means “women” or “wives.” It is possible that this refers to women who serve as deacons, “deaconesses.” The evidence is as follows: (1) The immediate context refers to deacons; (2) the author mentions nothing about wives in his section on elder qualifications (1 Tim 3:1-7); (3) it would seem strange to have requirements placed on deacons’ wives without corresponding requirements placed on elders’ wives; and (4) elsewhere in the NT, there seems to be room for seeing women in this role (cf. Rom 16:1 and the comments there). The translation “wives”—referring to the wives of the deacons—is probably to be preferred, though, for the following reasons: (1) It would be strange for the author to discuss women deacons right in the middle of the qualifications for male deacons; more naturally they would be addressed by themselves. (2) The author seems to indicate clearly in the next verse that women are not deacons: “Deacons must be husbands of one wife.” (3) Most of the qualifications given for deacons elsewhere do not appear here. Either the author has truncated the requirements for women deacons, or he is not actually referring to women deacons; the latter seems to be the more natural understanding. (4) The principle given in 1 Tim 2:12 appears to be an overarching principle for church life which seems implicitly to limit the role of deacon to men. Nevertheless, a decision in this matter is difficult, and our conclusions must be regarded as tentative.</p></p>
<p id="n5400316"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400316">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “men married only once,” “devoted solely to their wives” (see the note on “wife” in 1 Tim 3:2; also 1 Tim 5:9; Titus 1:6).</p></p>
<p id="n5400317"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400317">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> The statement <i>those who have served well as deacons gain a good standing for themselves</i> is reminiscent of Jesus’ teaching (Matt 20:26-28; Mark 10:43-45) that the one who wishes to be great must be a servant (<span class="greek">διάκονος</span> [<span class="translit">diakonos</span>], used here of deacons) of all, just as the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve (<span class="greek">διακονέω</span> [<span class="translit">diakoneō</span>], as in 1 Tim 3:10, 13).</p></p>
<p id="n5400318"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400318">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> In the phrase <i>the faith that is in Christ Jesus</i>, the term <i>faith</i> seems to mean “what Christians believe, Christian truth,” rather than personal trust in Christ. So the whole phrase could mean that others will come to place greater confidence in them regarding Christian truth, but the word “confidence” is much more likely to refer to their own boldness to act on the truth of their convictions.</p></p>
<p id="n5400319"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these things.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>These instructions</i> refer to the instructions about local church life, given in 1 Tim 2:1-3:13.</p></p>
<p id="n5400320"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “how it is necessary to behave.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400321"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which is” (but the relative clause shows the reason for such conduct).</p></p>
<p id="n5400322"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “confessedly, admittedly, most certainly.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400323"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “great is the mystery of [our] religion,” or “great is the mystery of godliness.” The word “mystery” denotes a secret previously hidden in God, but now revealed and made widely known (cf. Rom 16:25; 1 Cor 2:7; 4:1; Eph 1:9; 3:3, 4, 9; 6:19; Col 1:26-27; 4:3). “Religion” (<span class="greek">εὐσέβεια</span>, <span class="translit">eusebeia</span>) is a word used frequently in the pastorals with a range of meanings: (1) a certain attitude toward God—“devotion, reverence”; (2) the conduct that befits that attitude—“godliness, piety”; and (3) the whole system of belief and approach to God that forms the basis for such attitude and conduct—“religion, creed.” See BDAG 412-13 s.v.; 2 Tim 3:5; 4 Macc 9:6-7, 29-30; 15:1-3; 17:7. So the following creedal statements are illustrations of the great truths that the church is charged with protecting (v. 15).</p></p>
<p id="n5400324"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400324">24</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Byzantine text along with a few other witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>3</sup> A<sup>c</sup> C<sup>2</sup> D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> [88] 1241 1505 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> vg<sup>ms</sup>) read <span class="greek">θεός</span> (<span class="translit">theos</span>, “God”) for <span class="greek">ὅς</span> (<span class="translit">hos</span>, “who”). Most significant among these witnesses is 1739; the second correctors of some of the other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> tend to conform to the medieval standard, the Byzantine text, and add no independent voice to the textual problem. At least two <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have <span class="greek">ὁ θεός</span> (69 88), a reading that is a correction on the anarthrous <span class="greek">θεός</span>. On the other side, the masculine relative pronoun <span class="greek">ὅς</span> is strongly supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A* C* F G 33 365 1175 Did Epiph. Significantly, D* and virtually the entire Latin tradition read the neuter relative pronoun, <span class="greek">ὅ</span> (<span class="translit">ho</span>, “which”), a reading that indirectly supports <span class="greek">ὅς</span> since it could not easily have been generated if <span class="greek">θεός</span> had been in the text. Thus, externally, there is no question as to what should be considered the <i>Ausgangstext</i>: The Alexandrian and Western traditions are decidedly in favor of <span class="greek">ὅς</span>. Internally, the evidence is even stronger. What scribe would change <span class="greek">θεός</span> to <span class="greek">ὅς</span> intentionally? “Who” is not only a theologically pale reading by comparison; it also is much harder (since the relative pronoun has no obvious antecedent, probably the reason for the neuter pronoun of the Western tradition). Intrinsically, the rest of 3:16, beginning with <span class="greek">ὅς</span>, appears to form a hymn with six strophes. As such, it is a text that is seemingly incorporated into the letter without syntactical connection. Hence, not only should we <i>not</i> look for an antecedent for <span class="greek">ὅς</span> (as is often done by commentators), but the relative pronoun thus is not too hard a reading (or impossible, as Dean Burgon believed). Once the genre is taken into account, the relative pronoun fits neatly into the author’s style (cf. also Col 1:15; Phil 2:6 for other places in which the relative pronoun begins a hymn, as was often the case in poetry of the day). On the other hand, with <span class="greek">θεός</span> written as a <i>nomen sacrum</i>, it would have looked very much like the relative pronoun: <span class="uncial">q-=s</span> vs. <span class="uncial">os</span>. Thus, it may have been easy to confuse one for the other. This, of course, does not solve which direction the scribes would go, although given their generally high Christology and the bland and ambiguous relative pronoun, it is doubtful that they would have replaced <span class="greek">θεός</span> with <span class="greek">ὅς</span>. How then should we account for <span class="greek">θεός</span>? It appears that sometime after the 2nd century the <span class="greek">θεός</span> reading came into existence, either via confusion with <span class="greek">ὅς</span> or as an intentional alteration to magnify Christ and clear up the syntax at the same time. Once it got in, this theologically rich reading was easily able to influence all the rest of the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> it came in contact with (including <span class="smcaps">mss</span> already written, such as <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D). That this reading did not arise until after the 2nd century is evident from the Western reading, <span class="greek">ὅ</span>. The neuter relative pronoun is certainly a “correction” of <span class="greek">ὅς</span>, conforming the gender to that of the neuter <span class="greek">μυστήριον</span> (<span class="translit">mustērion</span>, “mystery”). What is significant in this reading is (1) since virtually all the Western witnesses have either the masculine or neuter relative pronoun, the <span class="greek">θεός</span> reading was apparently unknown to them in the 2nd century (when the “Western” text seems to have originated, though its place of origination was most likely in the east); they thus supply strong indirect evidence of <span class="greek">ὅς</span> outside of Egypt in the 2nd century; (2) even 2nd century scribes were liable to misunderstand the genre, feeling compelled to alter the masculine relative pronoun because it appeared to them to be too harsh. The evidence, therefore, for <span class="greek">ὅς</span> is quite compelling, both externally and internally. As <i>TCGNT</i> 574 notes, “no uncial (in the first hand) earlier than the eighth or ninth century (<span class="greek">Ψ</span>) supports <span class="greek">θεός</span>; all ancient versions presuppose <span class="greek">ὅς</span> or <span class="greek">ὅ</span>; and no patristic writer prior to the last third of the fourth century testifies to the reading <span class="greek">θεός</span>.” Thus, the cries of certain groups that <span class="greek">θεός</span> has to be original must be seen as special pleading. To argue that heretics tampered with the text here is self-defeating, for most of the Western <i>fathers</i> who quoted the verse with the relative pronoun were quite orthodox, strongly affirming the deity of Christ. They would have dearly loved such a reading as <span class="greek">θεός</span>. Further, had heretics introduced a variant to <span class="greek">θεός</span>, a far more natural choice would have been <span class="greek">Χριστός</span> (<span class="translit">Christos</span>, “Christ”) or <span class="greek">κύριος</span> (<span class="translit">kurios</span>, “Lord”), since the text is self-evidently about Christ, but it is not self-evidently a proclamation of his deity. (See <i>ExSyn</i> 341-42, for a summary discussion on this issue and additional bibliographic references.)</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.”</p><p><b>sn</b> This passage has been typeset as poetry because many scholars regard this passage as poetic or hymnic. These terms are used broadly to refer to the genre of writing, not to the content. There are two broad criteria for determining if a passage is poetic or hymnic: “(a) <i>stylistic:</i> a certain rhythmical lilt when the passages are read aloud, the presence of <i>parallelismus membrorum</i> (i.e., an arrangement into couplets), the semblance of some metre, and the presence of rhetorical devices such as alliteration, <i>chiasmus</i>, and antithesis; and (b) <i>linguistic:</i> an unusual vocabulary, particularly the presence of theological terms, which is different from the surrounding context” (P. T. O’Brien, <i>Philippians</i> [NIGTC], 188-89). Classifying a passage as hymnic or poetic is important because understanding this genre can provide keys to interpretation. However, not all scholars agree that the above criteria are present in this passage, so the decision to typeset it as poetry should be viewed as a tentative decision about its genre. </p></p>
<p id="n5400325"><a href="file1176.xhtml#n5400325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in spirit.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
