<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 15</h2>
<p id="n460151"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n460151">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now I make known to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n460152"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n460152">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n460153"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n460153">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “among (the) first things.”</p></p>
<p id="n460154"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n460154">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he has been raised/is raised,” using a Greek tense that points to the present effect of the act of raising him. But in English idiom the temporal phrase “on the third day” requires a different translation of the verb.</p></p>
<p id="n460155"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n460155">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Cephas</i>. This individual is generally identified with the Apostle Peter (L&amp;N 93.211). Both the Aramaic name “Cephas” and the Greek name “Peter” are related to words in each language which mean “rock.”</p></p>
<p id="n460156"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n460156">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n460157"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n460157">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “most of whom remain until now.”</p></p>
<p id="n460158"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n460158">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">κοιμάω</span> (<span class="translit">koimaō</span>) literally means “sleep,” but it is often used in the Bible as a euphemism for death when speaking of believers. This metaphorical usage by its very nature emphasizes the hope of resurrection: Believers will one day “wake up” out of death. Here the term refers to death, but “sleep” was used in the translation to emphasize the metaphorical, rhetorical usage of the term.</p></p>
<p id="n460159"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n460159">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>One born at the wrong time</i>. The Greek word used here (<span class="greek">ἔκτρωμα</span>, <span class="translit">ektrōma</span>) refers to a premature birth, a miscarriage, or an aborted child. Paul uses it as a powerful figure of the unexpected, abnormal nature of his apostolic call.</p></p>
<p id="n4601510"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that he has been raised from the dead.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601511"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “asleep” in 15:6. This term is also used in v. 20.</p></p>
<p id="n4601512"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “through a human being” (a reference to Adam).</p></p>
<p id="n4601513"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “through a human being” (a reference to Jesus Christ).</p></p>
<p id="n4601514"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “then those who belong to Christ, at his coming.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601515"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a continuation of the previous sentence in the Greek text. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4601516"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “then the end” or “then (is) the end.” Paul explains how the “end” relates to resurrection in vv. 25-28.</p></p>
<p id="n4601517"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601517">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 8:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4601518"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601518">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> Many suggestions have been offered for the puzzling expression <i>baptized for the dead</i>. There are up to 200 different explanations for the passage; a summary is given by K. C. Thompson, “I Corinthians 15, 29 and Baptism for the Dead,” <i>Studia Evangelica</i> 2.1 (TU 87), 647-59. The most likely interpretation is that some Corinthians had undergone baptism to bear witness to the faith of fellow believers who had died without experiencing that rite themselves. Paul’s reference to the practice here is neither a recommendation nor a condemnation. He simply uses it as evidence from the lives of the Corinthians themselves to bolster his larger argument, begun in 15:12, that resurrection from the dead is a present reality in Christ and a future reality for them. Whatever they may have proclaimed, the Corinthians’ actions demonstrated that they had hope for a bodily resurrection. </p></p>
<p id="n4601519"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or, more literally, “I swear by the boasting in you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601520"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601520">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Although the witnesses for the shorter reading (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 0243 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) are not as strong as for the addition of <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> (<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>, “brothers”) at this juncture (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B K P 33 81 104 365 1175 2464 lat sy co), it is difficult to find a reason why scribes would either intentionally or unintentionally drop the address here. Thus, the shorter reading is slightly preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n4601522"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601522">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 22:13; 56:12.</p></p>
<p id="n4601523"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601523">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from the poet Menander, <i>Thais</i> 218, which Paul uses in a proverbial sense.</p></p>
<p id="n4601524"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and what you sow, you do not sow the body that will be, but a bare seed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601525"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “all flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one (flesh) of people, but another flesh of animals and another flesh of birds and another of fish.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601526"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption.” The “it” refers to the body, as v. 44 shows.</p></p>
<p id="n4601527"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “living soul”; a quotation from Gen 2:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4601528"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601528">28</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ A few significant witnesses have the future indicative <span class="greek">φορέσομεν</span> (<span class="translit">phoresomen</span>, “we will bear”; B I 6 630 1881 <i>al</i> sa) instead of the aorist subjunctive <span class="greek">φορέσωμεν</span> (<span class="translit">phoresōmen</span>, “let us bear”; <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 0243 33 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt bo). If the original reading is the future tense, then “we will bear” would be a guarantee that believers would be like Jesus (and unlike Adam) in the resurrection. If the aorist subjunctive is original, then “let us bear” would be a command to show forth the image of Jesus, i.e., to live as citizens of the kingdom that believers will one day inherit. The future indicative is not widespread geographically. At the same time, it fits the context well: Not only are there indicatives in this section (especially vv. 42-49), but the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) introducing the comparative <span class="greek">καθώς</span> (<span class="translit">kathōs</span>) seems best to connect to the preceding by furthering the same argument (what is, not what ought to be). For this reason, though, the future indicative could be a reading thus motivated by an early scribe. In light of the extremely weighty evidence for the aorist subjunctive, it is probably best to regard the aorist subjunctive as autographic. This connects well with v. 50, for there Paul makes a pronouncement that seems to presuppose some sort of exhortation. G. D. Fee (<i>First Corinthians</i> [NICNT], 795) argues for the originality of the subjunctive, stating that “it is nearly impossible to account for anyone’s having changed a clearly understandable future to the hortatory subjunctive so early and so often that it made its way into every textual history as the predominant reading.” The subjunctive makes a great deal of sense in view of the occasion of 1 Corinthians. Paul wrote to combat an over-realized eschatology in which some of the Corinthians evidently believed they were experiencing all the benefits of the resurrection body in the present, and thus that their behavior did not matter. If the subjunctive is the correct reading, it seems Paul makes two points: (1) that the resurrection is a bodily one, as distinct from an out-of-body experience, and (2) that one’s behavior in the interim does make a difference (see 15:32-34, 58).</p></p>
<p id="n4601529"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4601530"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Behold.”</p></p>
<p id="n4601531"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601531">31</a> <p><b>tc</b> The manuscripts are grouped into four basic readings here: (1) <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C 0243* 33 1739 have “we all will sleep, but we will not all be changed” (<span class="greek">πάντες κοιμηθησόμεθα</span>,<span class="greek"> οὐ πάντες δὲ ἀλλαγησόμεθα</span>); (2) <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> A<sup>c</sup> (F G) have “we will not all sleep, but we will not all be changed” (<span class="greek">πάντες οὐ κοιμηθησόμεθα</span>,<span class="greek"> οὐ πάντες δὲ ἀλλαγησόμεθα</span>); (3) D* lat Tert Ambst Spec read “we will all rise, but we will not all be changed.” (4) The wording <span class="greek">πάντες οὐ κοιμηθησόμεθα</span>,<span class="greek"> πάντες δὲ ἀλλαγησόμεθα</span> (“we will not all sleep, but we will all be changed”) is found in B D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 075 0243<sup>c</sup> 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy co. How shall we interpret such data? In light of the fact that Paul and his generation did in fact die, early scribes may have felt some embarrassment over the bald statement, “We will not all sleep” (<span class="greek">πάντες οὐ κοιμηθησόμεθα</span>). This could account for the first variant. Although the second variant could be viewed as a conflation of (1) and (4) (so <i>TCGNT</i> 502; G. D. Fee, <i>First Corinthians</i> [NICNT], 796), it could also have arisen consciously, to guard against the notion that all whom Paul was addressing should regard themselves as true believers. The third variant, prominent in the Western witnesses, may have arisen to counter those who would deny the final resurrection (so <i>TCGNT</i> 502). In any event, since the fourth reading has the best credentials externally and best explains the rise of the others it should be adopted as the authentic wording here.</p><p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “asleep” in 15:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4601532"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">ῥιπή</span> (<span class="translit">rhipē</span>) refers to a very rapid movement (BDAG 906 s.v.). This has traditionally been translated as “twinkling,” which implies an exceedingly fast—almost instantaneous—movement of the eyes, but this could be confusing to the modern reader since twinkling in modern English often suggests a faint, flashing light. In conjunction with the genitive <span class="greek">ὀφθαλμοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">ophthalmou</span>, “of an eye”), “blinking” is the best English equivalent (see, e.g., L&amp;N 16.5), although it does not convey the exact speed implicit in the Greek term.</p></p>
<p id="n4601533"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601533">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 25:8.</p></p>
<p id="n4601534"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601534">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Hos 13:14.</p></p>
<p id="n4601535"><a href="file1123.xhtml#n4601535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
