<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Corinthians 8</h2>
<p id="n470081"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n470081">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:8.</p></p>
<p id="n470082"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n470082">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “riches.”</p></p>
<p id="n470083"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n470083">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “spontaneously.”</p></p>
<p id="n470084"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n470084">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of ministering to.”</p></p>
<p id="n470085"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n470085">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> A new sentence was started here in the translation and the word “thus” was supplied to indicate that it expresses the result of the previous clause.</p></p>
<p id="n470086"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n470086">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “we exhorted.”</p></p>
<p id="n470087"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n470087">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “this work” are not in the Greek text but are implied. Direct objects in Greek were often omitted and must be supplied from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n470088"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n470088">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this grace.”</p></p>
<p id="n470089"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n470089">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as you abound.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700810"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700810">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading “the love from us that is in you” is very difficult in this context, for Paul is here enumerating the <i>Corinthians’</i> attributes: How is it possible for them to excel “in the love <i>from us</i> that is in you”? Most likely, because of this difficulty, several early scribes, as well as most later ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> [33] <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), altered the text to read “your love for us” (so NIV; <i>Grk</i> <span class="greek">ἐξ ὑμῶν ἐν ἡμῖν ἀγάπῃ</span> [<span class="translit">ex humōn en hēmin agapē</span>]). The reading <span class="greek">ἐξ ἡμῶν ἐν ὑμῖν ἀγάπῃ</span> (<span class="translit">ex hēmōn en humin agapē</span>) is found, however, in excellent and early witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B 0243 6 104 630 1175 1739 1881 co). As the harder reading it explains the rise of the other reading. What, then, is the force of “in the love from us that is in you”? Most likely, Paul is commending the Corinthians for excelling in deriving some inspiration from the apostles’ love for them. </p></p>
<p id="n4700811"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700811">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you abound.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700812"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700812">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this grace.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700813"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700813">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “by means of the eagerness of others.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700814"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700814">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “generosity.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700815"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700815">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700816"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700816">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and now also complete the doing.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700817"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700817">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “just as the eagerness to want [it].”</p></p>
<p id="n4700818"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700818">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “complete from what you have.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700819"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700819">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the gift itself” are not in the Greek text but are implied. Translators often supply an English phrase like “it is” (NASB) but in the context, Paul is clearly referring to the collection Titus was to oversee (2 Cor 8:4-7). Therefore there is no reason not to specify the referent (the gift) more narrowly for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4700820"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700820">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “their lack.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700821"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700821">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “gathered” is not in the Greek text, but is implied (so also for the second occurrence of the word later in the verse).</p></p>
<p id="n4700822"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700822">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 16:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4700823"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700823">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “eagerness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700824"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700824">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> The comparative form of this adjective is used here with elative meaning.</p></p>
<p id="n4700825"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700825">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb has been translated as an epistolary aorist.</p></p>
<p id="n4700826"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700826">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of his own free will.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700827"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700827">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb has been translated as an epistolary aorist.</p></p>
<p id="n4700828"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700828">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the brother of whom the praise in the gospel [is] throughout all the churches.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700829"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700829">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “gospel, and not only this, but.” Here a new sentence was started in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4700830"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700830">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the brother mentioned in v. 18) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4700831"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700831">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, the offering or collection being taken to assist impoverished Christians.</p></p>
<p id="n4700832"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700832">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to help” are not in the Greek text but are implied (see L&amp;N 25.68).</p></p>
<p id="n4700833"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700833">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> “This” refers to sending the brother mentioned in 2 Cor 8:18 to Corinth along with Titus. The words “We did this” have no equivalent in the Greek text, but are necessary to maintain the thought flow in English. The Greek participle that begins v. 20 continues the sentence begun in v. 18 which concerns the sending of the other brother mentioned there.</p></p>
<p id="n4700834"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700834">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Prov 3:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4700835"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700835">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> This verb has been translated as an epistolary aorist.</p></p>
<p id="n4700836"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700836">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “If concerning Titus” (<span class="greek">εἴτε ὑπὲρ Τίτου</span>, <span class="translit">eite huper Titou</span>); the Greek sentence opens with an ellipsis which must be supplied: If [there is any question] about Titus.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700837"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700837">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “apostles.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700838"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700838">38</a> <p><b>tc</b> The sense of this translation is attested by the fact that most of the later <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, along with several early and significant ones (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0225 0243 1739 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), have the imperative verb <span class="greek">ἐνδείξασθε</span> (<span class="translit">endeixasthe</span>) in place of the participle <span class="greek">ἐνδεικνύμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">endeiknumenoi</span>), which is found in B D* F G 33. Since an imperatival participle is more Hebraic in style, many scribes would not have understood the idiom as easily and would have been likely to change the participle to an imperative (so <i>TCGNT</i> 513-14). But there is no good reason why scribes would change the imperative into a participle. Thus, <span class="greek">ἐνδεικνύμενοι</span> is almost surely the wording of the original text.</p><p><b>tn</b> In the Greek text <span class="greek">ἐνδεικνύμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">endeiknumenoi</span>) is a present participle which is translated as an imperative verb (see BDF §468; <i>ExSyn</i> 650-52).</p></p>
<p id="n4700839"><a href="file1133.xhtml#n4700839">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “our boasting about you.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
