<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Corinthians 4</h2>
<p id="n470041"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n470041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “just as we have been shown mercy”; <span class="greek">ἠλεήθημεν</span> (<span class="translit">ēleēthēmen</span>) has been translated as a “divine passive” which is a circumlocution for God as the active agent. For clarity this was converted to an active construction with God as subject in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n470042"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n470042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “we do not lose heart.”</p></p>
<p id="n470043"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n470043">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 13.156; the word can also mean “to assert opposition to,” thus here “we have denounced” (L&amp;N 33.220).</p></p>
<p id="n470044"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n470044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the hidden things [deeds] of shame”; here <span class="greek">αἰσχύνης</span> (<span class="translit">aischunēs</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n470045"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n470045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “not conducting ourselves”; <i>Grk</i> “not walking” (a common NT idiom for conduct, way of life, or behavior).</p></p>
<p id="n470046"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n470046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “craftiness.”</p></p>
<p id="n470047"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n470047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of unbelievers.”</p></p>
<p id="n470048"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n470048">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the gospel of the glory”; <span class="greek">δόξης</span> (<span class="translit">doxēs</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n470049"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n470049">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “so that the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ would not be evident to them” (L&amp;N 28.37).</p></p>
<p id="n4700410"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “preach.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700411"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “servants.” Though <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) is normally translated “servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. Also, many slaves in the Roman world became slaves through Rome’s subjugation of conquered nations, kidnapping, or by being born into slave households. </p></p>
<p id="n4700412"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700412">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Gen 1:3; see also Isa 9:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4700413"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the light of the knowledge of the glory”; <span class="greek">δόξης</span> (<span class="translit">doxēs</span>) has been translated as an attributive genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n4700414"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700414">14</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most witnesses, including several early and significant ones (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C H <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0209 1739<sup>c</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy), read <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsou Christou</span>, “Jesus Christ”), while other significant witnesses, especially of the Western text (D F G 0243 630 1739* 1881 lat Ambst), have <span class="greek">Χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ</span>. The reading with just <span class="greek">Χριστοῦ</span> is found in A B 33 sa Tert Or Ath Chr. Even though the witnesses for the shorter reading are not numerous, they are weighty. And in light of the natural scribal proclivity to fill out the text, particularly with reference to divine names, as well as the discrepancy among the witnesses as to the order of the names, the simple reading <span class="greek">Χριστοῦ</span> seems to be the best candidate for authenticity. NA<sup>28</sup> reads <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ</span> with <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> in brackets, indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4700415"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the surpassingness of the power”; <span class="greek">δυνάμεως</span> (<span class="translit">dunameōs</span>) has been translated as an attributed genitive (“extraordinary power”).</p></p>
<p id="n4700416"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “we are hard pressed [by crowds] on every side.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700417"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “at a loss.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700418"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forsaken.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700419"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “badly hurt.” It is possible to interpret <span class="greek">καταβαλλόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">kataballomenoi</span>) here as “badly hurt”: “[we are] badly hurt, but not destroyed” (L&amp;N 20.21).</p></p>
<p id="n4700420"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The first clause of 2 Cor 4:10 is elliptical and apparently refers to the fact that Paul was constantly in danger of dying in the same way Jesus died (by violence at least). According to L&amp;N 23.99 it could be translated, “at all times we live in the constant threat of being killed as Jesus was.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700421"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “may also be revealed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700422"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “may also be revealed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700423"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “mortal flesh.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700424"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “So then.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700425"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “death is at work in us, but life in you”; the phrase “is at work in” is repeated in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4700426"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700426">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “spirit of faith according to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700427"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700427">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 116:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4700428"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700428">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “speak, because.” A new sentence was started here in the translation, with the words “We do so” supplied to preserve the connection with the preceding statement.</p></p>
<p id="n4700429"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700429">29</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several significant witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C D F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1881), as well as the Byzantine text, add <span class="greek">κύριον</span> (<span class="translit">kurion</span>) here, changing the reading to “the Lord Jesus.” Although the external evidence in favor of the shorter reading is slim, the witnesses are significant, early, and diverse (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B [0243 33] 629 [630] 1175* [1739] r sa). Very likely scribes with pietistic motives added the word <span class="greek">κύριον</span>, as they were prone to do, thus compounding this title for the Lord.</p></p>
<p id="n4700430"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700430">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “that is abounding to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700431"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700431">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to abound.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700432"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700432">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “do not lose heart.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700433"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700433">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “our outer man.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700434"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700434">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “our inner [man].”</p></p>
<p id="n4700435"><a href="file1129.xhtml#n4700435">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “momentary lightness of affliction.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
