<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Corinthians 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Corinthians<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Food Sacrificed to Idols</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> With regard to food sacrificed to idols, we know that “we all have knowledge.”<sup><a id="n460081" href="file1116_notes.xhtml#n460081">1</a></sup> Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up. <span class="verse">8:2</span> If someone thinks he knows something, he does not yet know to the degree that he needs to know. <span class="verse">8:3</span> But if someone loves God, he<sup><a id="n460082" href="file1116_notes.xhtml#n460082">2</a></sup> is known by God.<sup><a id="n460083" href="file1116_notes.xhtml#n460083">3</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:4</span> With regard then to eating food sacrificed to idols, we know that “an idol in this world is nothing,” and that “there is no God but one.”<sup><a id="n460084" href="file1116_notes.xhtml#n460084">4</a></sup> <span class="verse">8:5</span> If after all there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth (as there are many gods and many lords), <span class="verse">8:6</span> yet for us there is one God, the Father, from whom are all things and for whom we live, and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things and through whom we live.<sup><a id="n460085" href="file1116_notes.xhtml#n460085">5</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:7</span> But this knowledge is not shared by all. And some, by being accustomed to idols in former times, eat this food as an idol sacrifice, and their conscience, because it is weak, is defiled. <span class="verse">8:8</span> Now food will not bring us close to God. We are no worse if we do not eat and no better if we do. <span class="verse">8:9</span> But be careful that this liberty of yours does not become a hindrance to the weak. <span class="verse">8:10</span> For if someone weak sees you who possess knowledge dining in an idol’s temple, will not his conscience be “strengthened”<sup><a id="n460086" href="file1116_notes.xhtml#n460086">6</a></sup> to eat food offered to idols? <span class="verse">8:11</span> So by your knowledge the weak brother or sister,<sup><a id="n460087" href="file1116_notes.xhtml#n460087">7</a></sup> for whom Christ died, is destroyed.<sup><a id="n460088" href="file1116_notes.xhtml#n460088">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">8:12</span> If you sin against your brothers or sisters<sup><a id="n460089" href="file1116_notes.xhtml#n460089">9</a></sup> in this way and wound their weak conscience, you sin against Christ. <span class="verse">8:13</span> For this reason, if food causes my brother or sister to sin, I will never eat meat again, so that I may not cause one of them<sup><a id="n4600810" href="file1116_notes.xhtml#n4600810">10</a></sup> to sin. </p>

</body>
</html>