<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Matthew 5</h2>
<p id="n400051"><a href="file974.xhtml#n400051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n400052"><a href="file974.xhtml#n400052">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “up a mountain” (<span class="greek">εἰς τὸ ὄρος</span>, <span class="translit">eis to oros</span>).</p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>up the mountain</i> here may be idiomatic or generic, much like the English “he went to the hospital” (cf. 15:29), or even intentionally reminiscent of Exod 24:12 (LXX), since the genre of the Sermon on the Mount seems to be that of a new Moses giving a new law.</p></p>
<p id="n400053"><a href="file974.xhtml#n400053">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n400054"><a href="file974.xhtml#n400054">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And opening his mouth he taught them, saying.” The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐδίδασκεν</span> (<span class="translit">edidasken</span>) has been translated ingressively.</p></p>
<p id="n400055"><a href="file974.xhtml#n400055">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>Blessed</i> introduces the first of several beatitudes promising blessing to those whom God cares for. They serve as an invitation to come into the grace God offers.</p></p>
<p id="n400056"><a href="file974.xhtml#n400056">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The poor in spirit</i> is a reference to the “pious poor” for whom God especially cares. See Pss 14:6; 22:24; 25:16; 34:6; 40:17; 69:29.</p></p>
<p id="n400057"><a href="file974.xhtml#n400057">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> The present tense (<i>belongs</i>) here is significant. Jesus makes the kingdom and its blessings currently available. This phrase is unlike the others in the list with the possessive pronoun being emphasized.</p></p>
<p id="n400058"><a href="file974.xhtml#n400058">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> The promise <i>they will be comforted</i> is the first of several “reversals” noted in these promises. The beatitudes and the reversals that accompany them serve in the sermon as an invitation to enter into God’s care, because one can know God cares for those who turn to him.</p></p>
<p id="n400059"><a href="file974.xhtml#n400059">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Those who hunger</i> are people like the poor Jesus has already mentioned. The term has OT roots both in conjunction with the poor (Isa 32:6-7; 58:6-7, 9-10; Ezek 18:7, 16) or by itself (Pss 37:16-19; 107:9).</p></p>
<p id="n4000510"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sons,” though traditionally English versions have taken this as a generic reference to both males and females, hence “children” (cf. KJV, NAB, NRSV, NLT).</p></p>
<p id="n4000511"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “when they insult you.” The third person pronoun (here implied in the verb <span class="greek">ὀνειδίσωσιν</span> [<span class="translit">oneidisōsin</span>]) has no specific referent, but refers to people in general.</p></p>
<p id="n4000512"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000512">12</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although <span class="greek">ψευδόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">pseudomenoi</span>, “bearing witness falsely”) could be a motivated reading, clarifying that the disciples are unjustly persecuted, its lack in only D it sy<sup>s</sup> Tert does not help its case. Since the Western text is known for numerous free alterations, without corroborative evidence the shorter reading must be judged as secondary.</p></p>
<p id="n4000513"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000513">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Salt</i> was used as seasoning or fertilizer (BDAG 41 s.v. <span class="greek">ἅλας</span> a), or as a preservative. If salt ceased to be useful, it was thrown away. With this illustration Jesus warned about a disciple who ceased to follow him.</p></p>
<p id="n4000514"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000514">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> The difficulty of this saying is understanding how <i>salt</i> could lose <i>its flavor</i> since its chemical properties cannot change. It is thus often assumed that Jesus was referring to chemically impure salt, perhaps a natural salt which, when exposed to the elements, had all the genuine salt leached out, leaving only the sediment or impurities behind. Others have suggested that the background of the saying is the use of salt blocks by Arab bakers to line the floor of their ovens; under the intense heat these blocks would eventually crystallize and undergo a change in chemical composition, finally being thrown out as unserviceable. A saying in the Talmud (<i>b. Bekhorot</i> 8b) attributed to R. Joshua ben Chananja (ca. <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 90), recounts how when he was asked the question “When salt loses its flavor, how can it be made salty again?” is said to have replied, “By salting it with the afterbirth of a mule.” He was then asked, “Then does the mule (being sterile) bear young?” to which he replied: “Can salt lose its flavor?” The point appears to be that both are impossible. The saying, while admittedly late, suggests that culturally the loss of flavor by salt was regarded as an impossibility. Genuine salt can never lose its flavor. In this case the saying by Jesus here may be similar to Matt 19:24, where it is likewise impossible for the camel to go through the eye of a sewing needle.</p></p>
<p id="n4000515"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Nor do they light.” The plural in Greek is indefinite, referring to people in general.</p></p>
<p id="n4000516"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a bowl”; the Greek word refers to any container for dry material of about eight liters (two gallons) capacity. It could be translated “basket, box, bowl” (L&amp;N 6.151).</p></p>
<p id="n4000517"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not come to abolish but to fulfill.” Direct objects (“these things,” “them”) were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but have been supplied here to conform to contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4000518"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For I tell.” Here an explanatory <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4000519"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000520"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Not one <i>iota</i> or one serif.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>smallest letter</i> refers to the smallest Hebrew letter (<i>yod</i>) and the <i>stroke of a letter</i> to a serif (a hook or projection on a Hebrew letter).</p></p>
<p id="n4000521"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000521">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “teaches men” ( in a generic sense, people).</p></p>
<p id="n4000522"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “that of the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 2:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4000523"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000523">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 3:7.</p></p>
<p id="n4000524"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the ancient ones.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>an older generation</i> can be understood to refer to the Israelites at the time of the Exodus, the original audience for the ten commandments.</p></p>
<p id="n4000525"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000525">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 20:13; Deut 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n4000526"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000526">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> These additional words are not part of the commandment and are not directly quoted from the OT (and thus are not placed in bold italics), but they form an adequate summary of several OT passages dealing with legislation concerning murder (Exod 21:12; Lev 24:17; Num 35:12; Deut 17:8-13).</p></p>
<p id="n4000527"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000527">27</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> read the word <span class="greek">εἰκῇ</span> (<span class="translit">eikē</span>, “without cause”) here after “brother.” This insertion has support from <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D L W <span class="greek">Γ</span> <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> 0233 ƒ<sup>1, 13</sup> 33 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it sy co Ir<sup>lat</sup> Or<sup>mss</sup> Cyp Cyr. Thus the Western and Byzantine groups, as well as several other witnesses, all include the word, while the best Alexandrian and some other witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>64</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B aur vg Or Hier<sup>mss</sup>) lack it. The ms evidence favors its exclusion, though there is a remote possibility that <span class="greek">εἰκῇ</span> could have been accidentally omitted from these witnesses by way of homoioarcton (the next word, <span class="greek">ἔνοχος</span> [<span class="translit">enochos</span>, “guilty”], begins with the same letter). An intentional change would likely arise from the desire to qualify “angry,” especially in light of the absolute tone of Jesus’ words. While “without cause” makes good practical sense in this context, and must surely be a true interpretation of Jesus’ meaning (cf. Mark 3:5), it does not commend itself as the original wording.</p></p>
<p id="n4000528"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whoever says to his brother ‘<i>Raca</i>,’” an Aramaic word of contempt or abuse meaning “fool” or “empty head.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000529"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “subjected,” “guilty,” “liable.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000530"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Sanhedrin.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>council</i> refers to the Sanhedrin, the ruling council in Jerusalem that was the highest legal, legislative, and judicial body among the Jews.</p></p>
<p id="n4000531"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000531">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> The meaning of the term <span class="greek">μωρός</span> (<span class="translit">mōros</span>) is somewhat disputed. Most take it to mean, following the Syriac versions, “you fool,” although some have argued that it represents a transliteration into Greek of the Hebrew term <span class="hebrew">&#8207;מוֹרֵה&#8206;</span> (<span class="translit">moreh</span>) “rebel” (Deut 21:18, 20; cf. BDAG 663 s.v. <span class="greek">μωρός</span> c).</p></p>
<p id="n4000532"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “subjected,” “guilty,” “liable.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000533"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Gehenna of fire.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The word translated <i>hell</i> is “Gehenna” (<span class="greek">γέεννα</span>, <span class="translit">geenna</span>), a Greek transliteration of the Hebrew words <i>ge hinnom</i> (“Valley of Hinnom”). This was the valley along the south side of Jerusalem. In OT times it was used for human sacrifices to the pagan god Molech (cf. Jer 7:31; 19:5-6; 32:35), and it came to be used as a place where human excrement and rubbish were disposed of and burned. In the intertestamental period, it came to be used symbolically as the place of divine punishment (cf. <i>1 En</i>. 27:2; 90:26; <i>4 Ezra</i> 7:36).</p></p>
<p id="n4000534"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000534">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Make friends.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000535"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to court” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4000536"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000536">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the accuser.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000537"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000538"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the English word “penny” is used as opposed to the parallel in Luke 12:59 where “cent” appears since the Greek word there is different and refers to a different but similar coin.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>penny</i> here was a quadrans, a Roman copper coin worth 1/64 of a denarius (L&amp;N 6.78). The parallel passage in Luke 12:59 mentions the lepton, equal to one-half of a quadrans and thus the smallest coin available.</p></p>
<p id="n4000539"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000539">39</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 20:14; Deut 5:18 (5:17 LXX).</p></p>
<p id="n4000540"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000540">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> On this word here and in the following verse, see the note on the word <i>hell</i> in 5:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4000541"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000541">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a written notice of divorce.”</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 24:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4000542"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000542">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>except for immorality</i> (often referred to as the “exception clause”) has been the subject of much debate. One of the best and most comprehensive recent studies which pays particular attention to historical background material, especially Jewish material, is that of D. Instone-Brewer, <i>Divorce and Remarriage in the Bible: The Social and Literary Context</i> (Eerdmans, 2002).</p></p>
<p id="n4000543"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the ancient ones.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000544"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000544">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 19:12.</p></p>
<p id="n4000546"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000546">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> The final clause is an allusion to Ps 48:2. In light of Ps 48:1-2 most understand <i>the great King</i> as a reference to God in this context (thus the capitalization).</p></p>
<p id="n4000547"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000547">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The term <span class="greek">πονηροῦ</span> (<span class="translit">ponērou</span>) may be understood as specific and personified, referring to the devil, or possibly as a general reference to evil. It is most likely personified, however, since it is articular and how it fits into the surrounding context (<span class="greek">τοῦ πονηροῦ</span>, <span class="translit">tou ponērou</span>). Cf. also “the evildoer” in v. 39, which is the same construction.</p></p>
<p id="n4000548"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000548">48</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 21:24; Lev 24:20.</p></p>
<p id="n4000549"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000549">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The articular <span class="greek">πονηρός</span> (<span class="translit">ponēros</span>, “the evildoer”) cannot be translated simply as “evil” for then the command would be “do not resist evil.” Every instance of this construction in Matthew is most likely personified, referring either to an evildoer (13:49) or, more often, “the evil one” (as in 5:37; 6:13; 13:19, 38).</p></p>
<p id="n4000550"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000550">50</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Many <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B D K L <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 565 579 700 1424 <i>pm</i>; SBL) have <span class="greek">σου</span> (<span class="translit">sou</span>) here (“<i>your</i> right cheek”), but many others lack the pronoun (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> W ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 892 1241 <i>pm</i>). The pronoun was probably added by way of clarification, as is evident by the fact that it floats in the verse: it is found both before and after “cheek.” NA<sup>28</sup> has <span class="greek">σου</span> in brackets, indicating doubt as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4000551"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000551">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “shirt” (a long garment worn under the cloak next to the skin). The name for this garment (<span class="greek">χιτών</span>, <span class="translit">chitōn</span>) presents some difficulty in translation. Most modern readers would not understand what a “tunic” was any more than they would be familiar with a “<i>chiton</i>.” On the other hand, attempts to find a modern equivalent are also a problem: “Shirt” conveys the idea of a much shorter garment that covers only the upper body, and “undergarment” (given the styles of modern underwear) is more misleading still. “Tunic” was therefore employed, but with a note to explain its nature.</p></p>
<p id="n4000552"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000552">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>If anyone forces you to go one mile</i>. In NT times Roman soldiers had the authority to press civilians into service to carry loads for them. The Greek verb is a semi-technical term and its only other NT uses are in Matt 27:32 and Mark 15:21, both of which refer to Simon of Cyrene being forced to carry Jesus’ cross.</p></p>
<p id="n4000553"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000553">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus advocates a generosity and a desire to meet those in dire need with the command <i>give to the one who asks you</i>. This may allude to begging; giving alms was viewed highly in the ancient world (Matt 6:1-4; Deut 15:7-11).</p></p>
<p id="n4000554"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000554">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “do not turn away from.”</p></p>
<p id="n4000555"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000555">55</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 19:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4000556"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000556">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>hate your enemy</i> does not occur explicitly in the OT, but was commonly inferred from passages like Deut 7:2; 30:7; Ps 26:5; Ps 139:21-22. Jesus’ hearers (and Matthew’s readers) would not have been surprised by the statement. It is the antithesis Jesus gives in the following verses that would have shocked them.</p></p>
<p id="n4000557"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000557">57</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D L W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 565 579 700 1241 1424 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy<sup>(p),h</sup>) read “bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who mistreat you,” before “those who persecute you.” But this is surely a motivated reading, importing the longer form of this aphorism from Luke 6:27-28. The shorter text is found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B ƒ<sup>1</sup> sy<sup>s,c</sup> sa bo<sup>pt</sup> mae, as well as several fathers. </p></p>
<p id="n4000558"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000558">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “be sons of your Father in heaven.” Here, however, the focus is not on attaining a relationship (becoming a child of God) but rather on being the kind of person who shares the characteristics of God himself (a frequent meaning of the Semitic idiom “son of”). See L&amp;N 58.26.</p></p>
<p id="n4000559"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000559">59</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Roman system of taxation was frequently characterized by “tax farming” where an individual would bid to collect taxes for the Roman government throughout an entire district and then add a surcharge or commission (often exorbitant) which they kept for themselves as their profit. The <i>tax collectors</i> referred to in the NT were generally not the holders of these tax contracts themselves, but hired subordinates who were often local residents. Since these tax collectors worked for Rome (even indirectly), they were viewed as traitors to their own people and were not well liked. In addition, the system offered many opportunities for dishonesty and greed, both of which were often associated with local tax collectors.</p></p>
<p id="n4000560"><a href="file974.xhtml#n4000560">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> This remark echoes OT statements in Lev 11:44-45 and Lev 19:2: “you must be holy as I am holy.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
