<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 10</h2>
<p id="n450101"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n450101">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n450102"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n450102">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on behalf of them”; the referent (Paul’s fellow Israelites) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n450103"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n450103">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they have a zeal for God.”</p></p>
<p id="n450104"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n450104">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in accord with knowledge.” </p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Their zeal is not in line with the truth</i> means that the Jews’ passion for God was strong, but it ignored the true righteousness of God (v. 3; cf. also 3:21).</p></p>
<p id="n450105"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n450105">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 18:5.</p></p>
<p id="n450106"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n450106">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 9:4.</p></p>
<p id="n450107"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n450107">7</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 30:12.</p></p>
<p id="n450108"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n450108">8</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 30:13.</p></p>
<p id="n450109"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n450109">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 30:14.</p></p>
<p id="n4501010"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501010">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Lord.” The Greek construction, along with the quotation from Joel 2:32 in v. 13 (in which the same “Lord” seems to be in view) suggests that <span class="greek">κύριον</span> (<span class="translit">kurion</span>) is to be taken as “the Lord,” that is, Yahweh. Cf. D. B. Wallace, “The Semantics and Exegetical Significance of the Object-Complement Construction in the New Testament,” <i>GTJ</i> 6 (1985): 91-112.</p></p>
<p id="n4501011"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501011">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “believes to righteousness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501012"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501012">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “confesses to salvation.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501013"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501013">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 28:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4501014"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501014">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Joel 2:32.</p></p>
<p id="n4501015"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501015">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “preaching”; the words “to them” are supplied for clarification.</p></p>
<p id="n4501016"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501016">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word in this context seems to mean “coming at the right or opportune time” (see BDAG 1103 s.v. <span class="greek">ὡραῖος</span> 1); it may also mean “beautiful, attractive, welcome.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501017"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501017">17</a>  <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the feet.” The metaphorical nuance of “beautiful feet” is that such represent timely news.</p></p>
<p id="n4501018"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501018">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 52:7; Nah 1:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4501019"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501019">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 53:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4501020"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501020">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here is <span class="greek">ῥῆμα</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma</span>), which often (but not exclusively) focuses on the spoken word.</p></p>
<p id="n4501021"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501021">21</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> A D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1241 1505 1881 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy) have <span class="greek">θεοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">theou</span>) here rather than <span class="greek">Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">Christou</span>; found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B C D* 6 81 629 1506 1739 lat co). Although the Nestle-Aland apparatus includes <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46vid</sup> for this reading, more recent photographs by CSNTM reveal it to be <span class="greek">κυρίου</span> (“Lord”), a singular reading. External evidence strongly favors the reading “Christ” here. Internal evidence is also on its side, for the expression <span class="greek">ῥῆμα Χριστοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma Christou</span>) occurs nowhere else in the NT; thus scribes would be prone to change it to a known expression.</p><p><b>tn</b> The genitive could be understood as either subjective (“Christ does the speaking”) or objective (“Christ is spoken about”), but the latter is more likely here.</p></p>
<p id="n4501022"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501022">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, Israel (see the following verse).</p></p>
<p id="n4501023"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501023">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they have not ‘not heard,’ have they?” This question is difficult to render in English. The basic question is a negative sentence (“Have they not heard?”), but it is preceded by the particle <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) which expects a negative response. The end result in English is a double negative (“They have not ‘not heard,’ have they?”). This has been changed to a positive question in the translation for clarity. See BDAG 646 s.v. <span class="greek">μή</span> 3.a.; D. Moo, <i>Romans</i> (NICNT), 666, fn. 32; and C. E. B. Cranfield, <i>Romans</i> (ICC), 537, for discussion.</p></p>
<p id="n4501024"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501024">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the particle <span class="greek">μενοῦνγε</span> (<span class="translit">menounge</span>) is correcting the negative response expected by the particle <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) in the preceding question. Since the question has been translated positively, the translation was changed here to reflect that rendering.</p></p>
<p id="n4501025"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501025">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 19:4.</p></p>
<p id="n4501026"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501026">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Israel did not ‘not know,’ did he?” The double negative in Greek has been translated as a positive affirmation for clarity (see v. 18 above for a similar situation). </p></p>
<p id="n4501027"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501027">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 32:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4501028"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501028">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 65:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4501029"><a href="file1101.xhtml#n4501029">29</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Isa 65:2.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
