<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 8</h2>
<p id="n460081"><a href="file1116.xhtml#n460081">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>We all have knowledge</i>.” Here and in v. 4 Paul cites certain slogans the Corinthians apparently used to justify their behavior (cf. 6:12-13; 7:1; 10:23). Paul agrees with the slogans in part, but corrects them to show how the Corinthians have misused these ideas.</p></p>
<p id="n460082"><a href="file1116.xhtml#n460082">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one.”</p></p>
<p id="n460083"><a href="file1116.xhtml#n460083">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; in the translation the most likely referent (God) has been specified for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n460084"><a href="file1116.xhtml#n460084">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> “<i>An idol in this world is nothing</i>” and “<i>There is no God but one</i>.” Here and in v. 1 Paul cites certain slogans the Corinthians apparently used to justify their behavior (cf. 6:12-13; 7:1; 10:23). Paul agrees with the slogans in part, but corrects them to show how the Corinthians have misused these ideas.</p></p>
<p id="n460085"><a href="file1116.xhtml#n460085">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “through whom [are] all things and we [are] through him.”</p></p>
<p id="n460086"><a href="file1116.xhtml#n460086">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “built up”; This is the same word used in v. 1b. It is used ironically here: The weak person is “built up” to commit what he regards as sin.</p></p>
<p id="n460087"><a href="file1116.xhtml#n460087">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the one who is weak…the brother for whom Christ died,” but see note on the word “Christian” in 5:11.</p></p>
<p id="n460088"><a href="file1116.xhtml#n460088">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> This may be an indirect middle, “destroys himself.”</p></p>
<p id="n460089"><a href="file1116.xhtml#n460089">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n4600810"><a href="file1116.xhtml#n4600810">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my brother.” Both “my brother or sister” earlier in the verse and “one of them” here translate the same Greek phrase. Since the same expression occurs in the previous line, a pronoun phrase is substituted here to suit English style, which is less tolerant of such repetition.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
