<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<p id="n540061"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n540061">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “servants.” Though <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span> (<span class="translit">doulos</span>) is normally translated “servant,” the word does not bear the connotation of a free individual serving another. BDAG notes that “‘servant’ for ‘slave’ is largely confined to Biblical transl. and early American times…in normal usage at the present time the two words are carefully distinguished” (BDAG 260 s.v.). One good translation is “bondservant” (sometimes found in the ASV for <span class="greek">δοῦλος</span>) in that it often indicates one who sells himself into slavery to another. But as this is archaic, few today understand its force. Also, many slaves in the Roman world became slaves through Rome’s subjugation of conquered nations, kidnapping, or by being born into slave households. </p></p>
<p id="n540062"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n540062">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that the name…may not be slandered” (a continuation of the preceding sentence).</p></p>
<p id="n540063"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n540063">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the teaching.”</p></p>
<p id="n540064"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n540064">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “slandered.”</p></p>
<p id="n540065"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n540065">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “think the less of them”; <i>Grk</i> “despise them,” “look down on them.”</p></p>
<p id="n540066"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n540066">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “those who devote themselves to service are faithful and dearly loved” (referring to slaves who serve them).</p></p>
<p id="n540067"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n540067">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “these things teach and exhort.”</p></p>
<p id="n540068"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n540068">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “teaches other doctrines,” (different from apostolic teaching, cf. 1 Tim 1:3).</p></p>
<p id="n540069"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n540069">9</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although most witnesses, including some early versions and fathers (D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> sy Cyp Lcf Ambst), have <span class="greek">ἀφίστασο ἀπὸ τῶν τοιούτων</span> (<span class="translit">aphistaso apo</span>’<span class="translit"> tōn toioutōn</span>, “stay away from such things!”) after <span class="greek">εὐσεβείαν</span> (<span class="translit">eusebeian</span>, “godliness”; thus, “who suppose that godliness is a way of making a profit; stay away from such things!”), there seems to be little reason for this clause’s omission in some of the oldest and best witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A D* F G 048 6 33 81 1175 1739 1881 lat co). It is likely that it crept into the text early, perhaps as a marginal comment, but it should not be considered authentic in light of the strong external and transcriptional evidence against it.</p></p>
<p id="n5400610"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400610">10</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Greek conjunction<span class="greek"> ὅτι</span> usually means “because,” but here it takes the sense “so that” (see BDAG 732 s.v. 5.c). This unusual sense led to textual variation as scribes attempted to correct what appeared to be an error: D* along with a few versional and patristic witnesses read <span class="greek">ἀληθὲς ὅτι</span> (“it is true that”), and <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> sy read <span class="greek">δῆλον ὅτι</span> (“it is clear that”). Thus the simple conjunction is preferred on internal as well as external grounds, supported by <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A F G 048 33 81 1739 1881.</p></p>
<p id="n5400611"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with these.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400612"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> This could be taken to mean “a root,” but the phrase “of all evils” clearly makes it definite. This seems to be not entirely true to life (some evils are unrelated to love of money), but it should be read as a case of hyperbole (exaggeration to make a point more strongly).</p></p>
<p id="n5400613"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Many translations render this “of all kinds of evil,” especially to allow for the translation “a root” along with it. But there is no parallel for taking a construction like this to mean “all kinds of” or “every kind of.” The normal sense is “all evils.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400614"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “O man of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400615"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “flee these things.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400616"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> This phrase literally means “compete in the good competition of the faith,” using words that may refer to a race or to a boxing or wrestling match: “run the good race” or “fight the good fight.” The similar phrase in 1 Tim 1:18 uses a military picture and is more literally “war the good warfare.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400617"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400617">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> At some point in Timothy’s life, he publicly acknowledged Jesus as the resurrected Lord, perhaps either at his baptism or his ordination as a minister of the gospel. With this reminder of the historical moment of his <i>good confession</i>, Timothy is encouraged to remain steadfast in his faith and to finish his life as a minister in the same way it began (see G. W. Knight, <i>Pastoral Epistles</i> [NIGTC], 264-65).</p></p>
<p id="n5400618"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “confessed the good confession.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400619"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400619">19</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most witnesses, some of them significant (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> A D H 1175 1505 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> lat sy bo), have <span class="greek">σοι</span> (<span class="translit">soi</span>, “you”) after <span class="greek">παραγγέλλω</span> (<span class="translit">parangellō</span>, “I charge [you]”), a predictable variant because the personal pronoun is demanded by the sense of the passage (and was added in the translation because of English requirements). Hence, the omission is the harder reading, and the addition of <span class="greek">σοι</span> is one of clarification. Further, the shorter reading is found in several significant witnesses, such as <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 6 33 1739. Although the external evidence is evenly balanced, internally the shorter reading is preferred. NA <sup>28</sup> places <span class="greek">σοι</span> in brackets, indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I charge.” </p></p>
<p id="n5400620"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “testified the good confession.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ good confession was his affirmative answer to Pilate’s question “Are you the king of the Jews?” (see Matt 27:11, Mark 15:2, Luke 23:3, John 18:33-37).</p></p>
<p id="n5400621"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek word <span class="greek">τηρέω</span> (<span class="translit">tēreō</span>, traditionally translated “keep”) in this context connotes preservation of and devotion to an object as well as obedience.</p></p>
<p id="n5400622"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400622">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the command.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>command</i> refers to the duties laid upon Timothy for his ministry in Ephesus (1 Tim 1:3-20; 6:2c-5).</p></p>
<p id="n5400623"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400623">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which.” All of 1 Tim 6:15 is a relative clause which refers back to “appearing” in v.14. The phrase “whose appearing” was supplied to clarify this connection.</p></p>
<p id="n5400624"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the present age.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400625"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400625">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in uncertainty.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400626"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400626">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to do good” (the continuation of 6:17). Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started at the beginning of v. 18.</p></p>
<p id="n5400627"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to be generous,” “sharing.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400628"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400628">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saving up” (the continuation of 6:18). Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started at the beginning of v. 19.</p></p>
<p id="n5400629"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400629">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “treasuring up a good foundation.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400630"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400630">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that they may lay hold of.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400631"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400631">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “avoiding.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5400632"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “contradictions.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400633"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400633">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the falsely named knowledge.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400634"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400634">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have deviated concerning the faith.”</p></p>
<p id="n5400635"><a href="file1179.xhtml#n5400635">35</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> D<sup>1</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1175 1241 1505 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i> sy bo) conclude this letter with <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> (<span class="translit">amēn</span>, “amen”). Such a conclusion is routinely added by scribes to NT books because a few of these books originally had such an ending (cf. Rom 16:27; Gal 6:18; Jude 25). A majority of Greek witnesses have the concluding <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> in every NT book except Acts, James, and 3 John (and even in these books, <span class="greek">ἀμήν</span> is found in some witnesses). It is thus a predictable variant. Further, the earliest and best witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* A D* F G 33 81 1739* 1881 it sa) lack the particle, indicating that the letter concluded with “Grace be with you all.”</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with you” (but the Greek pronoun indicates the meaning is plural here).</p></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
