<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 14</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 14</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation to Mutual Forbearance</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:1</span> Now receive the one who is weak in the faith, and do not have disputes over differing opinions.<sup><a id="n450141" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n450141">1</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:2</span> One person believes in eating everything, but the weak person eats only vegetables. <span class="verse">14:3</span> The one who eats everything must not despise the one who does not, and the one who abstains must not judge the one who eats everything, for God has accepted him. <span class="verse">14:4</span> Who are you to pass judgment on another’s servant? Before his own master he stands or falls. And he will stand, for the Lord<sup><a id="n450142" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n450142">2</a></sup> is able to make him stand. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:5</span> One person regards one day holier than other days, and another regards them all alike.<sup><a id="n450143" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n450143">3</a></sup> Each must be fully convinced in his own mind. <span class="verse">14:6</span> The one who observes the day does it for the Lord. The<sup><a id="n450144" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n450144">4</a></sup> one who eats, eats for the Lord because he gives thanks to God, and the one who abstains from eating abstains for the Lord, and he gives thanks to God. <span class="verse">14:7</span> For none of us lives for himself and none dies for himself. <span class="verse">14:8</span> If we live, we live for the Lord; if we die, we die for the Lord. Therefore, whether we live or die, we are the Lord’s. <span class="verse">14:9</span> For this reason Christ died and returned to life, so that he may be the Lord of both the dead and the living. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:10</span> But you who eat vegetables only—why do you judge your brother or sister?<sup><a id="n450145" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n450145">5</a></sup> And you who eat everything—why do you despise your brother or sister?<sup><a id="n450146" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n450146">6</a></sup> For we will all stand before the judgment seat<sup><a id="n450147" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n450147">7</a></sup> of God. <span class="verse">14:11</span> For it is written, “<i><b>As I live, says the Lord, every knee will bow to me, and every tongue will give praise to God</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n450148" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n450148">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:12</span> Therefore, each of us will give an account of himself to God.<sup><a id="n450149" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n450149">9</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Exhortation for the Strong not to Destroy the Weak</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:13</span> Therefore we must not pass judgment on one another, but rather determine never to place an obstacle or a trap before a brother or sister.<sup><a id="n4501410" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n4501410">10</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:14</span> I know and am convinced in the Lord Jesus that there is nothing unclean in itself; still, it is unclean to the one who considers it unclean. <span class="verse">14:15</span> For if your brother or sister<sup><a id="n4501411" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n4501411">11</a></sup> is distressed because of what you eat,<sup><a id="n4501412" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n4501412">12</a></sup> you are no longer walking in love.<sup><a id="n4501413" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n4501413">13</a></sup> Do not destroy by your food someone for whom Christ died. <span class="verse">14:16</span> Therefore do not let what you consider good<sup><a id="n4501414" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n4501414">14</a></sup> be spoken of as evil. <span class="verse">14:17</span> For the kingdom of God does not consist of food and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. <span class="verse">14:18</span> For the one who serves Christ in this way is pleasing to God and approved by people.<sup><a id="n4501415" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n4501415">15</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">14:19</span> So then, let us pursue what makes for peace and for building up one another. <span class="verse">14:20</span> Do not destroy the work of God for the sake of food. For although all things are clean,<sup><a id="n4501416" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n4501416">16</a></sup> it is wrong to cause anyone to stumble by what you eat. <span class="verse">14:21</span> It is good not to eat meat or drink wine or to do anything that causes your brother to stumble.<sup><a id="n4501417" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n4501417">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">14:22</span> The faith<sup><a id="n4501418" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n4501418">18</a></sup> you have, keep to yourself before God. Blessed is the one who does not judge himself by what he approves. <span class="verse">14:23</span> But the man who doubts is condemned if he eats, because he does not do so from faith, and whatever is not from faith is sin.<sup><a id="n4501419" href="file1105_notes.xhtml#n4501419">19</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>