<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Corinthians 9</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Corinthians<br />Chapter 9</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Preparing the Gift</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">9:1</span> For it is not necessary<sup><a id="n470091" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n470091">1</a></sup> for me to write you about this service<sup><a id="n470092" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n470092">2</a></sup> to the saints, <span class="verse">9:2</span> because I know your eagerness to help.<sup><a id="n470093" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n470093">3</a></sup> I keep boasting to the Macedonians about this eagerness of yours,<sup><a id="n470094" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n470094">4</a></sup> that Achaia has been ready to give<sup><a id="n470095" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n470095">5</a></sup> since last year, and your zeal to participate<sup><a id="n470096" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n470096">6</a></sup> has stirred up most of them.<sup><a id="n470097" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n470097">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:3</span> But I am sending<sup><a id="n470098" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n470098">8</a></sup> these brothers so that our boasting about you may not be empty in this case, so that you may be ready<sup><a id="n470099" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n470099">9</a></sup> just as I kept telling them. <span class="verse">9:4</span> For if any of the Macedonians should come with me and find that you are not ready to give, we would be humiliated<sup><a id="n4700910" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700910">10</a></sup> (not to mention you) by this confidence we had in you.<sup><a id="n4700911" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700911">11</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:5</span> Therefore I thought it necessary to urge these brothers to go to you in advance and to arrange ahead of time the generous contribution<sup><a id="n4700912" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700912">12</a></sup> you had promised, so this may be ready as a generous gift<sup><a id="n4700913" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700913">13</a></sup> and not as something you feel forced to do.<sup><a id="n4700914" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700914">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:6</span> My point is this: The person who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and the person who sows generously<sup><a id="n4700915" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700915">15</a></sup> will also reap generously. <span class="verse">9:7</span> Each one of you should give<sup><a id="n4700916" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700916">16</a></sup> just as he has decided in his heart,<sup><a id="n4700917" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700917">17</a></sup> not reluctantly<sup><a id="n4700918" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700918">18</a></sup> or under compulsion,<sup><a id="n4700919" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700919">19</a></sup> because God loves a cheerful giver. <span class="verse">9:8</span> And God is able to make all grace overflow<sup><a id="n4700920" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700920">20</a></sup> to you so that because you have enough<sup><a id="n4700921" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700921">21</a></sup> of everything in every way at all times, you will overflow<sup><a id="n4700922" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700922">22</a></sup> in every good work. <span class="verse">9:9</span> Just as it is written, “<b><i>He</i></b><sup><a id="n4700923" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700923">23</a></sup> <i><b>has scattered widely, he has given to the poor; his righteousness remains forever</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n4700924" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700924">24</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:10</span> Now God<sup><a id="n4700925" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700925">25</a></sup> who provides seed for the sower and bread for food will provide and multiply your supply of seed and will cause the harvest of your righteousness to grow. <span class="verse">9:11</span> You will be enriched in every way so that you may be generous on every occasion,<sup><a id="n4700926" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700926">26</a></sup> which is producing through us thanksgiving to God, <span class="verse">9:12</span> because the service of this ministry is not only providing for<sup><a id="n4700927" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700927">27</a></sup> the needs of the saints but is also overflowing with many thanks to God. <span class="verse">9:13</span> Through the evidence<sup><a id="n4700928" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700928">28</a></sup> of this service<sup><a id="n4700929" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700929">29</a></sup> they will glorify God because of your obedience to your confession in the gospel of Christ and the generosity of your sharing<sup><a id="n4700930" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700930">30</a></sup> with them and with everyone. <span class="verse">9:14</span> And in their prayers on your behalf, they long for you because of the extraordinary grace God has shown to you.<sup><a id="n4700931" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700931">31</a></sup> <span class="verse">9:15</span> Thanks be to God for his indescribable gift!<sup><a id="n4700932" href="file1134_notes.xhtml#n4700932">32</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>