<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Romans 11</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Romans<br />Chapter 11</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Israel’s Rejection not Complete nor Final</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:1</span> So I ask, God has not rejected his people, has he? Absolutely not! For I too am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, from the tribe of Benjamin. <span class="verse">11:2</span> God has not rejected his people whom he foreknew! Do you not know what the scripture says about Elijah, how he pleads with God against Israel? <span class="verse">11:3</span> “Lord, <i><b>they have killed your prophets, they have demolished your altars; I alone am left and they are seeking my life!</b></i>”<sup><a id="n450111" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n450111">1</a></sup> <span class="verse">11:4</span> But what was the divine response<sup><a id="n450112" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n450112">2</a></sup> to him? “<b><i>I have kept</i></b> for myself <b><i>7,000 people</i></b><sup><a id="n450113" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n450113">3</a></sup> <b><i>who have not bent the knee to Baal</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n450114" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n450114">4</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:5</span> So in the same way at the present time there is a remnant chosen by grace. <span class="verse">11:6</span> And if it is by grace, it is no longer by works, otherwise grace would no longer be grace. <span class="verse">11:7</span> What then? Israel failed to obtain what it was diligently seeking, but the elect obtained it. The<sup><a id="n450115" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n450115">5</a></sup> rest were hardened, <span class="verse">11:8</span> as it is written,</p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<i><b>God gave them a spirit of stupor</b>,</i></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>eyes that would not see and ears that would not hear</b></i>, </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>to this very day</i>.</b>”<sup><a id="n450116" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n450116">6</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:9</span> And David says,</p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<i><b>Let their table become a snare and trap</b>,</i></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>a stumbling block and a retribution for them</b>;</i> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">11:10</span> <b><i>let their eyes be darkened so that they may not see,</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>and make their backs bend continually</i>.</b>”<sup><a id="n450117" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n450117">7</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:11</span> I ask then, they did not stumble into an irrevocable fall,<sup><a id="n450118" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n450118">8</a></sup> did they? Absolutely not! But by their transgression salvation has come to the Gentiles, to make Israel<sup><a id="n450119" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n450119">9</a></sup> jealous. <span class="verse">11:12</span> Now if their transgression means riches for the world and their defeat means riches for the Gentiles, how much more will their full restoration<sup><a id="n4501110" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501110">10</a></sup> bring?</p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:13</span> Now I am speaking to you Gentiles. Seeing that I am an apostle to the Gentiles, I magnify my ministry, <span class="verse">11:14</span> if somehow I could provoke my people to jealousy and save some of them. <span class="verse">11:15</span> For if their rejection is the reconciliation of the world, what will their acceptance be but life from the dead? <span class="verse">11:16</span> If the first portion<sup><a id="n4501111" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501111">11</a></sup> of the dough offered is holy, then the whole batch is holy, and if the root is holy, so too are the branches.<sup><a id="n4501112" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501112">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:17</span> Now if some of the branches were broken off, and you, a wild olive shoot, were grafted in among them and participated in<sup><a id="n4501113" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501113">13</a></sup> the richness of the olive root, <span class="verse">11:18</span> do not boast over the branches. But if you boast, remember that you do not support the root, but the root supports you. <span class="verse">11:19</span> Then you will say, “The branches were broken off so that I could be grafted in.” <span class="verse">11:20</span> Granted!<sup><a id="n4501114" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501114">14</a></sup> They were broken off because of their unbelief, but you stand by faith. Do not be arrogant, but fear! <span class="verse">11:21</span> For if God did not spare the natural branches, perhaps he will not spare you. <span class="verse">11:22</span> Notice therefore the kindness and harshness of God—harshness toward those who have fallen, but<sup><a id="n4501115" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501115">15</a></sup> God’s kindness toward you, provided you continue in his kindness;<sup><a id="n4501116" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501116">16</a></sup> otherwise you also will be cut off. <span class="verse">11:23</span> And even they—if they do not continue in their unbelief—will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again. <span class="verse">11:24</span> For if you were cut off from what is by nature a wild olive tree, and grafted, contrary to nature, into a cultivated olive tree, how much more will these natural branches be grafted back into their own olive tree? </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:25</span> For I do not want you to be ignorant of this mystery, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n4501117" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501117">17</a></sup> so that you may not be conceited: A partial hardening has happened to Israel<sup><a id="n4501118" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501118">18</a></sup> until the full number<sup><a id="n4501119" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501119">19</a></sup> of the Gentiles has come in. <span class="verse">11:26</span> And so<sup><a id="n4501120" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501120">20</a></sup> all Israel will be saved, as it is written:</p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<b><i>The Deliverer will come out of Zion;</i></b></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><i><b>he will remove ungodliness from Jacob</b></i>. </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">11:27</span> <i><b>And this is my covenant with them</b>,</i><sup><a id="n4501121" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501121">21</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>when I take away their sins</i>.</b>”<sup><a id="n4501122" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501122">22</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:28</span> In regard to the gospel they are enemies for your sake, but in regard to election they are dearly loved for the sake of the fathers. <span class="verse">11:29</span> For the gifts and the call of God are irrevocable. <span class="verse">11:30</span> Just as you were formerly disobedient to God, but have now received mercy due to their disobedience, <span class="verse">11:31</span> so they too have now been disobedient in order that, by the mercy shown to you, they too may now<sup><a id="n4501123" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501123">23</a></sup> receive mercy. <span class="verse">11:32</span> For God has consigned all people to disobedience so that he may show mercy to them all.<sup><a id="n4501124" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501124">24</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:33</span> Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments and how unfathomable his ways! </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">11:34</span> <i><b>For who has known the mind of the Lord</b>,</i></p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>or who has been his counselor?</i></b><sup><a id="n4501125" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501125">25</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">11:35</span> <i><b>Or who has first given to God</b>,</i><sup><a id="n4501126" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501126">26</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><b><i>that God</i></b><sup><a id="n4501127" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501127">27</a></sup> <b><i>needs to repay him?</i></b><sup><a id="n4501128" href="file1102_notes.xhtml#n4501128">28</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">11:36</span> For from him and through him and to him are all things. To him be glory forever! Amen. </p>

</body>
</html>