<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Revelation 7</h2>
<p id="n660071"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n660071">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n660072"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n660072">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the rising of the sun.” BDAG 74 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνατολή</span> 2.a takes this as a geographical direction: “<span class="greek">ἀπὸ ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> ἡλίου</span>…<i>from the east</i> Rv 7:2; 16:12…simply <span class="greek">ἀπὸ ἀ</span>.…21:13.”</p></p>
<p id="n660073"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n660073">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having,” but v. 3 makes it clear that the angel’s purpose is to seal others with the seal he carries.</p></p>
<p id="n660074"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n660074">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “signet” (L&amp;N 6.54).</p></p>
<p id="n660075"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n660075">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n660076"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n660076">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “permission” is implied; <i>Grk</i> “to whom it was given to them to damage the earth.”</p></p>
<p id="n660077"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n660077">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n660078"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n660078">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “servants” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n660079"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n660079">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the introduction of new but related material.</p></p>
<p id="n6600710"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600710">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who were sealed.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600711"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600711">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Normally, “every,” but since 144,000 is the total number, “all” is clearer here.</p></p>
<p id="n6600712"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600712">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the sons of Israel,” normally an idiom for the Israelites as an ethnic entity (L&amp;N 11.58). However, many scholars understand the expression in this context to refer to Christians rather than ethnic Israelites.</p></p>
<p id="n6600713"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600713">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “and here was” expresses the sense of <span class="greek">καὶ ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">kai idou</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6600714"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600714">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated before each of the following categories, since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n6600715"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600715">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> The dative here has been translated as a dative of possession.</p></p>
<p id="n6600716"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600716">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb is pluperfect, but the force is simple past. See <i>ExSyn</i> 586.</p></p>
<p id="n6600717"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600717">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they fell down on their faces.” BDAG 815 s.v. <span class="greek">πίπτω</span> 1.b.<span class="greek">α</span>.<span class="hebrew">&#8207;ב&#8206;</span>. has “<i>fall down, throw oneself to the ground</i> as a sign of devotion or humility, before high-ranking persons or divine beings.”</p></p>
<p id="n6600718"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600718">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600719"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600719">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “spoke” or “declared to,” but in the context “asked” reads more naturally in English.</p></p>
<p id="n6600720"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600720">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the previous question.</p></p>
<p id="n6600721"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600721">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Though the expression “the answer” is not in the Greek text, it is clearly implied. Direct objects in Greek were frequently omitted when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n6600722"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600722">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the vision.</p></p>
<p id="n6600723"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600723">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n6600724"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600724">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “worship.” The word here is <span class="greek">λατρεύω</span> (<span class="translit">latreuō</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6600725"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600725">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will spread his tent over them,” normally an idiom for taking up residence with someone, but when combined with the preposition <span class="greek">ἐπί</span> (<span class="translit">epi</span>, “over”) the idea is one of extending protection or shelter (BDAG 929 s.v. <span class="greek">σκηνόω</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n6600726"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600726">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> An allusion to Isa 49:10. The phrase “burning heat” is one word in Greek (<span class="greek">καῦμα</span>, <span class="translit">kauma</span>) that refers to a burning, intensely-felt heat. See BDAG 536 s.v.</p></p>
<p id="n6600727"><a href="file1240.xhtml#n6600727">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 25:8.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
