<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 16</h2>
<p id="n450161"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n450161">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “deaconess.” It is debated whether <span class="greek">διάκονος</span> (<span class="translit">diakonos</span>) here refers to a specific office within the church. One contextual argument used to support this view is that Phoebe is associated with a particular church, Cenchrea, and as such would therefore be a deacon of that church. In the NT some who are called <span class="greek">διάκονος</span> are related to a particular church, yet the scholarly consensus is that such individuals are not deacons, but “servants” or “ministers” (other viable translations for <span class="greek">διάκονος</span>). For example, Epaphras is associated with the church in Colossians and is called a <span class="greek">διάκονος</span> in Col 1:7, but no contemporary translation regards him as a deacon. In 1 Tim 4:6 Paul calls Timothy a <span class="greek">διάκονος</span>; Timothy was associated with the church in Ephesus, but he obviously was not a deacon. In addition, the lexical evidence leans away from this view: Within the NT, the <span class="greek">διακον</span>- word group rarely functions with a technical nuance. In any case, the evidence is not compelling either way. The view accepted in the translation above is that Phoebe was a servant of the church, not a deaconess, although this conclusion should be regarded as tentative.</p></p>
<p id="n450162"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n450162">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> On <i>Prisca and Aquila</i> see also Acts 18:2, 18, 26; 1 Cor 16:19; 2 Tim 4:19. In the NT “Priscilla” and “Prisca” are the same person. Paul uses the name <i>Prisca,</i> while the author of Acts uses the diminutive form of the name Priscilla.</p></p>
<p id="n450163"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n450163">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> The spelling <i>Epenetus</i> is also used by NIV, NLT; the name is alternately spelled <i>Epaenetus</i> (NASB, NKJV, NRSV).</p></p>
<p id="n450164"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n450164">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “firstfruit.” This is a figurative use referring to Epenetus as the first Christian convert in the region.</p></p>
<p id="n450165"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n450165">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n450166"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n450166">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Junias.” </p><p><b>sn</b> The feminine name <i>Junia</i>, though common in Latin, is quite rare in Greek (apparently only three instances of it occur in Greek literature outside Rom 16:7, according to the data in the <i>TLG</i> [D. Moo, <i>Romans</i> [NICNT], 922]). The masculine <i>Junias</i> (as a contraction for <i>Junianas</i>), however, is rarer still: Only one instance of the masculine name is known in extant Greek literature (Epiphanius mentions Junias in his <i>Index discipulorum</i> 125). Further, since there are apparently other husband-wife teams mentioned in this salutation (Prisca and Aquila [v. 3], Philologus and Julia [v. 15]), it might be natural to think of Junia as a feminine name. (This ought not be pressed too far, however, for in v. 12 <i>all</i> three individuals are women [though the first two are linked together], and in vv. 9-11 all the individuals are men.) In Greek only a difference of accent distinguishes between Junias (male) and Junia (female). If it refers to a woman, it is possible (1) that she had the gift of apostleship (not the office), or (2) that she was not an apostle but along with Andronicus was esteemed by (or among) the apostles. As well, the term “prominent” probably means “well known,” suggesting that Andronicus and Junia(s) were well known to the apostles (see note on the phrase “well known” which follows).</p></p>
<p id="n450167"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n450167">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “kinsmen,” “relatives,” “fellow countrymen.”</p></p>
<p id="n450168"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n450168">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “prominent, outstanding, famous.” The term <span class="greek">ἐπίσημος</span> (<span class="translit">episēmos</span>) is used either in an implied comparative sense (“prominent, outstanding”) or in an elative sense (“famous, well known”). The key to determining the meaning of the term in any given passage is both the general context and the specific collocation of this word with its adjuncts. When a comparative notion is seen, that to which <span class="greek">ἐπίσημος</span> is compared is frequently, if not usually, put in the genitive case (cf., e.g., 3 Macc 6:1 [<span class="greek">Ελεαζαρος δέ τις ἀνὴρ <i>ἐπίσημος τῶν</i> ἀπὸ τής χώρας <i>ἱερέων</i></span> “Eleazar, a man <i>prominent among the priests</i> of the country”]; cf. also <i>Pss. Sol</i>. 17:30). When, however, an elative notion is found, <span class="greek">ἐν</span> (<span class="translit">en</span>) plus a personal plural dative is not uncommon (cf. <i>Pss. Sol</i>. 2:6). Although <span class="greek">ἐν</span> plus a personal dative does not indicate agency, in collocation with words of perception, (<span class="greek">ἐν</span> plus) dative personal nouns are often used to show the recipients. In this instance, the idea would then be “well known <i>to</i> the apostles.” See M. H. Burer and D. B. Wallace, “Was Junia Really an Apostle? A Re-examination of Rom 16.7,” <i>NTS</i> 47 (2001): 76-91, who argue for the elative notion here.</p></p>
<p id="n450169"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n450169">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “among the apostles.” See discussion in the note on “well known” for these options.</p></p>
<p id="n4501610"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “kinsman,” “relative,” “fellow countryman.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501611"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501611">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> The spelling <i>Tryphena</i> is also used by NIV, NKJV, NLT; the name is alternately spelled <i>Tryphaena</i> (NASB, NRSV).</p></p>
<p id="n4501612"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Greet the beloved.” </p></p>
<p id="n4501613"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and his mother and mine.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501614"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4501615"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “saints.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501616"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:13.</p></p>
<p id="n4501617"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hearts.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501618"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “kinsmen, relatives, fellow countrymen.”</p></p>
<p id="n4501619"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501619">19</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (D [F G 629 without “Jesus Christ”] <span class="greek">Ψ</span> [630] 1175 1241 1505 1881 <span class="apparatus">M</span> <i>al</i>) include here <b>16:24</b> “The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all of you. Amen.” Other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (P 33 104 365) include the verse after <b>16:27</b>. The verse is entirely lacking in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46, 61</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B C 81 1739 2464 co. The strength of the external evidence, combined with uncertainty in other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> over where the verse should be located and the fact that it is a repetition of v. 20b, strongly favors omission of the verse. The present translation follows NA<sup>28</sup> in omitting the verse number, a procedure also followed by a number of other modern translations.</p></p>
<p id="n4501620"><a href="file1107.xhtml#n4501620">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> There is a considerable degree of difference among the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> regarding the presence and position of the doxology of 16:25-27. Five situations present themselves from the ms tradition. The doxology is found in the ancient witnesses in three separate locations: (1) here after 16:23 (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>61</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C D 81 365 630 1739 2464 <i>al</i><sup></sup> co), (2) after 14:23 (<span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0209<sup>vid</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>), or (3) after 15:33 (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup>). The situation is further complicated in that some of the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have these verses in two places: (4) after 14:23 <i>and</i> after 16:23 (A P 33 104); or (5) after 14:23 <i>and</i> after 15:33 (1506). The uncertain position of the doxology might suggest that it was added by later scribes. But since the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> containing the doxology are so early and widespread, it almost certainly belongs in Romans; it is only a question of where. Further, the witnesses that omit the doxology are few: F G 629 Hier<sup>mss</sup>. (And of these, G has a blank space of several lines large enough for the doxology to belong there.) Only two positions (after chapter 14 only and at the end of the letter only) deserve particular notice because the situation of the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> showing the doxology in two places dates back to the 5th century. Later copyists, faced with the doxology in two different places in the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> they knew, may have decided to copy the doxology in both places, since they were unwilling to consciously omit any text. Because the textual disruption of the doxology is so early, <i>TCGNT</i> 472 suggests two possibilities: either (1) that Paul may have sent two different copies of Romans—a copy lacking chapter 16 and a copy with the full text of the epistle as we now have it, or (2) Marcion or some of his followers circulated a shortened form of the epistle that lacked chapters 15 and 16. Those <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that lacked chapters 15-16 would naturally conclude with some kind of doxology after chapter 14. On the other hand, H. Gamble (<i>The Textual History of the Letter to the Romans</i> [SD], 123-32) argues for the position of the doxology at 14:23, since to put the doxology at 16:25 would violate Paul’s normal pattern of a grace-benediction at the close of the letter. Gamble further argues for the inclusion of 16:24, since the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that put the doxology after chapter 14 almost always present 16:24 as the letter’s closing, whereas most of the <span class="smcaps">mss</span> that put the doxology at its traditional position drop 16:24, perhaps because it would be redundant before 16:25-27. A decision is difficult, but the weight of external evidence, since it is both early and geographically widespread, suggests that the doxology belongs here after 16:23 and that v. 24 is not authentic. For a full discussion, see <i>TCGNT</i> 470-73.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
