<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 13</h2>
<p id="n460131"><a href="file1121.xhtml#n460131">1</a> <p><b>tc</b> The reading <span class="greek">καυχήσωμαι</span> (<span class="translit">kauchēsōmai</span>, “I might boast”) is well supported by <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B 048 33 1739* co Hier<sup>mss</sup>. The competing reading, <span class="greek">καυθήσομαι</span> (<span class="translit">kauthēsomai</span>, “I will burn”), is found in C D F G L 81 1175 1881* <i>al</i> latt and a host of patristic writers. From this reading other variants were obviously derived: <span class="greek">καυθήσωμαι</span> (<span class="translit">kauthēsōmai</span>), a future subjunctive (“I might burn”) read by the Byzantine text and a few others (<span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1739<sup>c</sup> 1881<sup>c</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>); and <span class="greek">καυθῇ</span> (<span class="translit">kauthē</span>, “it might be burned”) read by 1505. On an external level, the Alexandrian reading is obviously superior, though the Western and Byzantine readings need to be accounted for. (The following discussion is derived largely from <i>TCGNT</i> 497-98). Internally, <span class="greek">καυχήσωμαι</span> is superior for the following reasons: (1) Once the Church started suffering persecution and martyrdom by fire, the <i>v.l</i>. naturally arose. Once there, it is difficult to see why any scribe would intentionally change it to <span class="greek">καυχήσωμαι</span>. (2) Involving as it does the change of just two letters (<span class="greek">χ</span> to <span class="greek">θ</span> [<span class="translit">ch</span> to <span class="translit">th</span>], <span class="greek">ω</span> to <span class="greek">ο</span> [<span class="translit">ō</span> to <span class="translit">o</span>]), this reading could be accomplished without much fanfare. Yet, it appears cumbersome in the context, both because of the passive voice and especially the retention of the first person (“If I give up my body that I may be burned”). A more logical word would have been the third person passive, <span class="greek">καυθῇ</span>, as read in 1505 (“If I give up my body that it may be burned”). (3) Although the connection between giving up one’s body and boasting is ambiguous, this very ambiguity has all the earmarks of being from Paul. It may have the force of giving up one’s body into slavery. In any event, it looks to be the harder reading. Incidentally, the Byzantine reading is impossible because the future subjunctive did not occur in Koine Greek. As the reading of the majority of Byzantine minuscules, its roots are clearly post-Koine and as such is a “grammatical monstrosity that cannot be attributed to Paul” (<i>TCGNT</i> 498). Cf. also the notes in BDF §28; MHT 2:219.</p></p>
<p id="n460132"><a href="file1121.xhtml#n460132">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “when completion.”</p></p>
<p id="n460133"><a href="file1121.xhtml#n460133">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term translated “adult” here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), a term which ordinarily refers to males, husbands, etc. In this context Paul contrasts the states of childhood and adulthood, so the term has been translated “adult”; cf. BDAG 79 s.v. 1.b.</p></p>
<p id="n460134"><a href="file1121.xhtml#n460134">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “we are seeing through [= using] a mirror by means of a dark image.” Corinth was well known in the ancient world for producing some of the finest bronze mirrors available. Paul’s point in this analogy, then, is not that our current understanding and relationship with God is distorted (as if the mirror reflected poorly), but rather that it is “indirect,” (i.e., the nature of looking in a mirror) compared to the relationship we will enjoy with him in the future when we see him “face-to-face” (cf. G. D. Fee, <i>First Corinthians</i> [NICNT], 648). The word “indirectly” translates the Greek phrase <span class="greek">ἐν αἰνίγματι</span> (<span class="translit">en ainigmati</span>, “in an obscure image”) which itself may reflect an allusion to Num 12:8 (LXX <span class="greek">οὐ δι᾿ αἰνιγμάτων</span>), where God says that he speaks to Moses “mouth to mouth [= face-to-face]…and not in dark figures [of speech].” Though this allusion to the OT is not explicitly developed here, it probably did not go unnoticed by the Corinthians who were apparently familiar with OT traditions about Moses (cf. 1 Cor 10:2). Indeed, in 2 Cor 3:13-18 Paul had recourse with the Corinthians to contrast Moses’ ministry under the old covenant with the hope afforded through apostolic ministry and the new covenant. Further, it is in this context, specifically in 2 Cor 3:18, that the apostle invokes the use of the mirror analogy again in order to unfold the nature of the Christian’s progressive transformation by the Spirit.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
