<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Romans 6</h2>
<p id="n450061"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n450061">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “may walk in newness of life,” in which <span class="greek">ζωῆς</span> (<span class="translit">zōēs</span>) functions as an attributed genitive (see <i>ExSyn</i> 89-90, where this verse is given as a prime example).</p></p>
<p id="n450062"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n450062">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “we will certainly also of his resurrection.”</p></p>
<p id="n450063"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n450063">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing this, that.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n450064"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n450064">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “may be rendered ineffective, inoperative,” or possibly “may be destroyed.” The term <span class="greek">καταργέω</span> (<span class="translit">katargeō</span>) has various nuances. In Rom 7:2 the wife whose husband has died is <i>freed</i> from the law (i.e., the law of marriage no longer has any power over her, in spite of what she may feel). A similar point seems to be made here (note v. 7).</p></p>
<p id="n450065"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n450065">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> Verse 7 forms something of a parenthetical comment in Paul’s argument.</p></p>
<p id="n450066"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n450066">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing.” Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n450067"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n450067">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The present tense here has been translated as a futuristic present (see <i>ExSyn</i> 536, where this verse is listed as an example).</p></p>
<p id="n450068"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n450068">8</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Some Alexandrian and Byzantine <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup><span class="greek">94</span>vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>* B C 81 365 1506 1739 1881) have the infinitive “to be” (<span class="greek">εἶναι</span>, <span class="translit">einai</span>) following “yourselves”. The infinitive is lacking from some <span class="smcaps">mss</span> of the Alexandrian and Western textual clusters (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46vid</sup> A D*<sup>,c</sup> F G 33). The infinitive is found elsewhere in the majority of Byzantine <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, suggesting a scribal tendency toward clarification. The lack of infinitive best explains the rise of the other readings. The meaning of the passage is not significantly altered by inclusion or omission, but on internal grounds omission is more likely. NA<sup>28</sup> includes the infinitive in brackets, indicating doubt as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n450069"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n450069">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> Greek emphasizes the contrast between these two clauses more than can be easily expressed in English.</p></p>
<p id="n4500610"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “weapons, tools.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500611"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “wickedness, injustice.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500612"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “weapons, tools.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500613"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to whom you present yourselves.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500614"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as slaves for obedience.” See the note on the word “slave” in 1:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4500615"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500615">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “either of sin unto death, or obedience unto righteousness.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500616"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “you were slaves of sin but you obeyed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500617"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “type, form.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500618"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because of your natural limitations” (NRSV). </p><p><b>sn</b> Verse 19 forms something of a parenthetical comment in Paul’s argument.</p></p>
<p id="n4500619"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500619">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fruit.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500620"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500620">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “have,” in a tense emphasizing their customary condition in the past.</p></p>
<p id="n4500621"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The two aorist participles translated “freed” and “enslaved” are causal in force; their full force is something like “But now, since you have become freed from sin and since you have become enslaved to God….”</p></p>
<p id="n4500622"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500622">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fruit.”</p></p>
<p id="n4500623"><a href="file1097.xhtml#n4500623">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> A figurative extension of <span class="greek">ὀψώνιον</span> (<span class="translit">opsōnion</span>), which refers to a soldier’s pay or wages. Here it refers to the end result of an activity, seen as something one receives back in return. In this case the activity is sin, and the translation “payoff” captures this thought. See also L&amp;N 89.42.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
