<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for John 19</h2>
<p id="n430191"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n430191">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “had him flogged,” or (traditional), “scourged him.” The verb should be read as causative. Pilate ordered Jesus to be flogged. A Roman governor would not carry out such a sentence in person. BDAG 620 s.v. <span class="greek">μαστιγόω</span> 1. states, “If J refers to the ‘verberatio’ given those condemned to death (TMommsen, Röm. Strafrecht 1899, 938f; Jos., Bell. 2, 308; 5, 449), it is odd that Pilate subsequently claims no cause for action (vs. 6); but if the latter statement refers only to the penalty of crucifixion, <span class="greek">μ</span>. vs. 1 may be equivalent to <span class="greek">παιδεύω</span> (q.v. 2b<span class="greek">γ</span>) in Lk 23:16, 22 (for <span class="greek">μ</span>. of a non-capital offense PFlor I, 61, 61 [85ad]=Mitt-Wilck. II/2, 80 II, 61).”</p><p><b>sn</b> This severe flogging was not administered by Pilate himself but his officers, who took Jesus at Pilate’s order and scourged him. The author’s choice of wording here may constitute an allusion to Isa 50:6, “I gave my back to those who beat me.” Three forms of corporal punishment were employed by the Romans, in increasing degree of severity: (1) <i>fustigatio</i> (beating), (2) <i>flagellatio</i> (flogging), and (3) <i>verberatio</i> (severe flogging, scourging). The first could be on occasion a punishment in itself, but the more severe forms were part of the capital sentence as a prelude to crucifixion. The most severe, <i>verberatio</i>, is what is indicated here by the Greek verb translated <i>flogged severely</i> (<span class="greek">μαστιγόω</span>, <span class="translit">mastigoō</span>). People died on occasion while being flogged this way; frequently it was severe enough to rip a person’s body open or cut muscle and sinew to the bone. It was carried out with a whip that had fragments of bone or pieces of metal bound into the tips.</p></p>
<p id="n430192"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n430192">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the soldiers.” The conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”) has not been translated here in keeping with the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences.</p></p>
<p id="n430193"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n430193">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “wove.”</p></p>
<p id="n430194"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n430194">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>crown of thorns</i> was a crown plaited of some thorny material, intended as a mockery of Jesus’ “kingship.” Traditionally it has been regarded as an additional instrument of torture, but it seems more probable the purpose of the thorns was not necessarily to inflict more physical suffering but to imitate the spikes of the “radiant corona,” a type of crown portrayed on ruler’s heads on many coins of the period; the spikes on this type of crown represented rays of light pointing outward (the best contemporary illustration is the crown on the head of the Statue of Liberty in New York harbor).</p></p>
<p id="n430195"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n430195">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>purple</i> color of the <i>robe</i> indicated royal status. This was further mockery of Jesus, along with the crown of thorns.</p></p>
<p id="n430196"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n430196">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they.” The conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”) has not been translated here in keeping with the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences.</p></p>
<p id="n430197"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n430197">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “again and again” are implied by the (iterative) imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἤρχοντο</span> (<span class="translit">ērchonto</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n430198"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n430198">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Long live the King of the Jews!”</p><p><b>sn</b> The greeting used by the soldiers, “<i>Hail, King of the Jews!</i>”, is a mockery based on the standard salutation for the Roman emperor, “<i>Ave, Caesar!</i>” (“Hail to Caesar!”).</p></p>
<p id="n430199"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n430199">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “repeatedly” is implied by the (iterative) imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐδιδοσαν</span> (<span class="translit">edidosan</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4301910"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to them.” The words “the Jewish leaders” are supplied from John 18:38 for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4301911"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301911">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “find no basis for an accusation”; <i>Grk</i> “find no cause.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301912"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301912">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on the <i>purple robe</i> in 19:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4301913"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301913">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (Pilate) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4301914"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301914">14</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Look, here is the man!</i> Pilate may have meant no more than something like “Here is the accused!” or in a contemptuous way, “Here is your king!” Others have taken Pilate’s statement as intended to evoke pity from Jesus’ accusers: “Look at this poor fellow!” (Jesus would certainly not have looked very impressive after the scourging). For the author, however, Pilate’s words constituted an unconscious allusion to Zech 6:12, “<i>Look, here is the man</i> whose name is the Branch.” In this case Pilate (unknowingly and ironically) presented Jesus to the nation under a messianic title.</p></p>
<p id="n4301915"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301915">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> Crucifixion was the cruelest form of punishment practiced by the Romans. Roman citizens could not normally undergo it. It was reserved for the worst crimes, like treason and evasion of due process in a capital case. The Roman statesman and orator Cicero (106-43 <span class="smcaps">b.c.</span>) called it “a cruel and disgusting penalty” (<i>Against Verres</i> 2.5.63-66 §§163-70); Josephus (<i>J. W</i>. 7.6.4 [7.203]) called it the worst of deaths.</p></p>
<p id="n4301916"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301916">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “him” is not in the Greek text. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from context.</p></p>
<p id="n4301917"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to them.” The words “to them” are not translated because they are unnecessary in contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4301918"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301918">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> How are Pilate’s words “<i>You take him and crucify him</i>” to be understood? Was he offering a serious alternative to the priests who wanted Jesus crucified? Was he offering them an exception to the statement in 18:31 that the Jewish authorities did not have the power to carry out a death penalty? Although a few scholars have suggested that the situation was at this point so far out of Pilate’s control that he really was telling the high priests they could go ahead and crucify a man he had found to be innocent, this seems unlikely. It is far more likely that Pilate’s statement should be understood as one of frustration and perhaps sarcasm. This seems to be supported by the context, for the Jewish authorities make no attempt at this point to seize Jesus and crucify him. Rather they continue to pester Pilate to order the crucifixion.</p></p>
<p id="n4301919"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this use of <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) used in exclamations and strong affirmations, see BDAG 190 s.v. <span class="greek">γάρ</span> 3.</p></p>
<p id="n4301920"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301920">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “find no basis for an accusation”; <i>Grk</i> “find no cause.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301921"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301921">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” In NT usage the term <span class="greek">᾿Ιουδαῖοι</span> (<span class="translit">Ioudaioi</span>) may refer to the entire Jewish people, the residents of Jerusalem and surrounding territory, the authorities in Jerusalem, or merely those who were hostile to Jesus. (For further information see R. G. Bratcher, “‘The Jews’ in the Gospel of John,” <i>BT</i> 26 [1975]: 401-9.) Here the phrase refers to the Jewish leaders, especially members of the Sanhedrin, and their servants (mentioned specifically as “the chief priests and their servants” in John 19:6).</p></p>
<p id="n4301922"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301922">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answered him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301923"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301923">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>law</i> is not the entire Pentateuch, but Lev 24:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4301924"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301924">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because he made himself out to be the Son of God.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301925"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301925">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “heard this word.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301926"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301926">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “became more afraid.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301927"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301927">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “into the praetorium.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301928"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301928">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said to him.” The words “to him” are not translated because they are unnecessary in contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4301929"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301929">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the power.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301930"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301930">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “know that I have the authority to release you and the authority to crucify you.” Repetition of “the authority” is unnecessarily redundant English style.</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Crucify</i> in 19:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4301931"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301931">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “power.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301932"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301932">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who delivered me over to you.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The one who handed me over to you</i> appears to be a reference to Judas at first; yet Judas did not deliver Jesus up to Pilate, but to the Jewish authorities. The singular may be a reference to Caiaphas, who as high priest was representative of all the Jewish authorities, or it may be a generic singular referring to all the Jewish authorities directly. In either case the end result is more or less the same.</p></p>
<p id="n4301933"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301933">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “has the greater sin” (an idiom).</p><p><b>sn</b> Because Pilate had no authority over Jesus except what had been given to him from God, the one who handed Jesus over to Pilate was <i>guilty of greater sin</i>. This does not absolve Pilate of guilt; it simply means his guilt was less than those who handed Jesus over to him, because he was not acting against Jesus out of deliberate hatred or calculated malice, like the Jewish religious authorities. These were thereby guilty of greater sin.</p></p>
<p id="n4301934"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301934">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sought.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301935"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301935">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” Here the phrase refers to the Jewish leaders, especially members of the Sanhedrin, and their servants (mentioned specifically as “the chief priests and their servants” in John 19:6). See the note on the phrase “Jewish leaders” in v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n4301936"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301936">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “shouted out, saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301937"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301937">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301938"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301938">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> Is the author using the phrase <i>Friend of Caesar</i> in a technical sense, as a title bestowed on people for loyal service to the Emperor, or in a more general sense merely describing a person as loyal to the Emperor? L. Morris (<i>John</i> [NICNT], 798) thinks it is “unlikely” that the title is used in the technical sense, and J. H. Bernard (<i>St. John</i> [ICC], 2:621) argues that the technical sense of the phrase as an official title was not used before the time of Vespasian (<span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 69-79). But there appears to be significant evidence for much earlier usage. Some of this is given in BDAG 498-99 s.v. <span class="greek">Καῖσαρ</span>. E. Bammel (“<span class="greek">φίλος τοῦ καίσαρος</span> (John 19:12),” <i>TLZ</i> 77 [1952]: 205-10) listed significant and convincing arguments that the official title was indeed in use at the time. Granting that the title was in use during this period, what is the likelihood that it had been bestowed on Pilate? Pilate was of the equestrian order, that is, of lower nobility as opposed to senatorial rank. As such he would have been eligible to receive such an honor. It also appears that the powerful Sejanus was his patron in Rome, and Sejanus held considerable influence with Tiberius. Tacitus (<i>Annals</i> 6.8) quotes Marcus Terentius in his defense before the Senate as saying that close friendship with Sejanus “was in every case a powerful recommendation to the Emperor’s friendship.” Thus it is possible that Pilate held this honor. Therefore it appears that the Jewish authorities were putting a good deal of psychological pressure on Pilate to convict Jesus. They had, in effect, finally specified the charge against Jesus as treason: “Everyone who makes himself to be king opposes Caesar.” If Pilate now failed to convict Jesus the Jewish authorities could complain to Rome that Pilate had released a traitor. This possibility carried more weight with Pilate than might at first be evident: (1) Pilate’s record as governor was not entirely above reproach; (2) Tiberius, who lived away from Rome as a virtual recluse on the island of Capri, was known for his suspicious nature, especially toward rivals or those who posed a political threat; and (3) worst of all, Pilate’s patron in Rome, Sejanus, had recently come under suspicion of plotting to seize the imperial succession for himself. Sejanus was deposed in October of <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 31. It may have been to Sejanus that Pilate owed his appointment in Judea. Pilate was now in a very delicate position. The Jewish authorities may have known something of this and deliberately used it as leverage against him. Whether or not they knew just how potent their veiled threat was, it had the desired effect. Pilate went directly to the judgment seat to pronounce his judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n4301939"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301939">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who makes himself out to be a king.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301940"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301940">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the judge’s seat.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>judgment seat</i> (<span class="greek">βῆμα</span>, <span class="translit">bēma</span>) was a raised platform mounted by steps and usually furnished with a seat. It was used by officials in addressing an assembly or making official pronouncements, often of a judicial nature.</p></p>
<p id="n4301941"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301941">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> The precise location of the place called <i>‘The Stone Pavement’</i> is still uncertain, although a paved court on the lower level of the Fortress Antonia has been suggested. It is not certain whether it was laid prior to <span class="smcaps">a.d.</span> 135, however.</p></p>
<p id="n4301942"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301942">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in Hebrew.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The author does not say that <i>Gabbatha</i> is the Aramaic (or Hebrew) translation for the Greek term <span class="greek">Λιθόστρωτον</span> (<span class="translit">Lithostrōton</span>). He simply points out that in Aramaic (or Hebrew) the place had another name. A number of meanings have been suggested, but the most likely appears to mean “elevated place.” It is possible that this was a term used by the common people for the judgment seat itself, which always stood on a raised platform.</p></p>
<p id="n4301943"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301943">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4301944"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301944">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>day of preparation</i> (<span class="greek">παρασκευή</span>, <span class="translit">paraskeuē</span>) appears in all the gospels as a description of the day on which Jesus died. It could refer to any Friday as the day of preparation for the Sabbath (Saturday), and this is the way the synoptic gospels use the term (Matt 27:62, Mark 15:42, and Luke 23:54). John, however, specifies in addition that this was not only the day of preparation of the Sabbath, but also the day of preparation of the Passover, so that the Sabbath on the following day was the Passover (cf. 19:31).</p></p>
<p id="n4301945"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301945">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “about the sixth hour.”</p><p><b>sn</b> For John, the time was especially important. When the note concerning the hour, <i>about noon</i>, is connected with the day, <i>the day of preparation for the Passover</i>, it becomes apparent that Jesus was going to die on the cross at the very time that the Passover lambs were being slain in the temple courts. Exod 12:6 required that the Passover lamb be kept alive until the 14th <i>Nisan</i>, the eve of the Passover, and then slaughtered by the head of the household at twilight (<i>Grk</i> “between the two evenings”). By this time the slaughtering was no longer done by the heads of households, but by the priests in the temple courts. But so many lambs were needed for the tens of thousands of pilgrims who came to Jerusalem to celebrate the feast (some estimates run in excess of 100,000 pilgrims) that the slaughter could not be completed during the evening, and so the rabbis redefined “between the two evenings” as beginning at noon, when the sun began to decline toward the horizon. Thus the priests had the entire afternoon of 14th <i>Nisan</i> in which to complete the slaughter of the Passover lambs. According to the Fourth Gospel, this is the time Jesus was dying on the cross.</p></p>
<p id="n4301946"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301946">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4301947"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301947">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he”; the referent (Pilate) has been specified in the translation for clarity, and the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”) has not been translated here in keeping with the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences.</p></p>
<p id="n4301948"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301948">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” Here the phrase refers to the Jewish leaders, especially members of the Sanhedrin, and their servants (mentioned specifically as “the chief priests and their servants” in John 19:6). See the note on the phrase “Jewish leaders” in v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n4301949"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301949">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then these.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301950"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301950">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “with him” (twice) are not in the Greek text. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4301951"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301951">51</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Crucify</i> in 19:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4301952"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301952">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Pilate said to them.” The words “to them” are not translated because it is clear in English who Pilate is addressing.</p></p>
<p id="n4301953"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301953">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then he”; the referent (Pilate) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4301954"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301954">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “delivered him over.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301955"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301955">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “carrying the cross by himself.”</p><p><b>sn</b> As was customary practice in a Roman crucifixion, the prisoner was made to carry <i>his own cross</i>. In all probability this was only the crossbeam, called in Latin the <i>patibulum</i>, since the upright beam usually remained in the ground at the place of execution. According to Matt 27:32 and Mark 15:21, the soldiers forced Simon to take the cross; Luke 23:26 states that the cross was placed on Simon so that it might be carried behind Jesus. A reasonable explanation of all this is that Jesus started out carrying the cross until he was no longer able to do so, at which point Simon was forced to take over.</p></p>
<p id="n4301956"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301956">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus was led out to <i>the place called “The Place of the Skull”</i> where he was to be crucified. It is clear from v. 20 that this was outside the city. The Latin word for the Greek <span class="greek">κρανίον</span> (<span class="translit">kranion</span>) is <i>calvaria</i>. Thus the English word “Calvary” is a transliteration of the Latin rather than a NT place name (cf. Luke 23:33 in the KJV).</p></p>
<p id="n4301957"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301957">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in Hebrew.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301958"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301958">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4301959"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301959">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “where they.” This is a continuation of the previous verse in Greek, but contemporary English style tends toward shorter sentences. A literal translation would result in a lengthy and awkward English sentence.</p></p>
<p id="n4301960"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301960">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Crucify</i> in 19:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4301961"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301961">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and with him two others.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301962"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301962">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “an inscription.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Mention of the inscription is an important detail, because the inscription would normally give the reason for the execution. It shows that Jesus was executed for claiming to be a king. It was also probably written with irony from the executioners’ point of view.</p></p>
<p id="n4301963"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301963">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Pilate also wrote a notice and placed it on the cross.” The two verbs should be read as causatives, since it is highly unlikely that the Roman governor would perform either of these actions himself. He ordered them to be done.</p><p><b>sn</b> John says simply that the <i>notice</i> was <i>fastened to the cross</i>. Luke 23:38 says the inscription was placed “over him” (Jesus), and Matt 27:37 that it was placed over Jesus’ head. On the basis of Matthew’s statement Jesus’ cross is usually depicted as the <i>crux immissa</i>, the cross which has the crossbeam set below the top of the upright beam. The other commonly used type of cross was the <i>crux commissa</i>, which had the crossbeam atop the upright beam. But Matthew’s statement is not conclusive, since with the <i>crux commissa</i> the body would have sagged downward enough to allow the placard to be placed above Jesus’ head. The placard with Pilate’s inscription is mentioned in all the gospels, but for John it was certainly ironic. Jesus really was <i>the King of the Jews</i>, although he was a king rejected by his own people (cf. 1:11). Pilate’s own motivation for placing the title over Jesus is considerably more obscure. He may have meant this as a final mockery of Jesus himself, but Pilate’s earlier mockery of Jesus seemed to be motivated by a desire to gain pity from the Jewish authorities in order to have him released. More likely Pilate saw this as a subtle way of getting back at the Jewish authorities who had pressured him into the execution of one he considered to be an innocent man.</p></p>
<p id="n4301964"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301964">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it was written.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301965"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301965">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” Here the phrase refers to the residents of Jerusalem in general. See also the note on the phrase Jewish religious leaders” in v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n4301966"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301966">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “this inscription.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301967"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301967">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in Hebrew.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301968"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301968">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish chief priests.” Nowhere else in the Fourth Gospel are the two expressions <span class="greek">οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων</span> (<span class="translit">hoi archiereis tōn Ioudaiōn</span>) combined. Earlier in 19:15 the chief priests were simply referred to as <span class="greek">οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς</span>. It seems likely that this is another example of Johannine irony, to be seen in contrast to the inscription on the cross which read <span class="greek">ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων</span> (<span class="translit">ho basileus tōn Ioudaiōn</span>). For this reason the phrase has been translated “the chief priests of the Jews” (which preserves in the translation the connection with “King of the Jews”) rather than “the Jewish chief priests.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301969"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301969">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Crucify</i> in 19:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4301970"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301970">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Four shares, one for each soldier</i>. The Gospel of John is the only one to specify the number of soldiers involved in the crucifixion. This was a <i>quaternion</i>, a squad of four soldiers. It was accepted Roman practice for the soldiers who performed a crucifixion to divide the possessions of the person executed among themselves.</p></p>
<p id="n4301971"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301971">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “shirt” (a long garment worn under the cloak next to the skin). The name for this garment (<span class="greek">χιτών</span>, <span class="translit">chitōn</span>) presents some difficulty in translation. Most modern readers would not understand what a ‘tunic’ was any more than they would be familiar with a ‘<i>chiton</i>.’ On the other hand, attempts to find a modern equivalent are also a problem: “Shirt” conveys the idea of a much shorter garment that covers only the upper body, and “undergarment” (given the styles of modern underwear) is more misleading still. “Tunic” was therefore employed, but with a note to explain its nature.</p></p>
<p id="n4301972"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301972">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “shirt” (a long garment worn under the cloak next to the skin). See the note on the same word earlier in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4301973"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301973">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4301974"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301974">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but choose by lot” (probably by using marked pebbles or broken pieces of pottery). A modern equivalent, “throw dice,” was chosen here because of its association with gambling.</p></p>
<p id="n4301975"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301975">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to see whose it will be.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301976"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301976">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “This took place” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4301977"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301977">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “cast lots.” See the note on “throw dice” earlier in the verse.</p><p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 22:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4301978"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301978">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> Several women are mentioned, but it is not easy to determine how many. It is not clear whether <i>his mother’s sister</i> and <i>Mary the wife of Clopas</i> are to be understood as the same individual (in which case only three women are mentioned: Jesus’ mother, her sister Mary, and Mary Magdalene) or as two different individuals (in which case four women are mentioned: Jesus’ mother, her sister, Mary Clopas’ wife, and Mary Magdalene). It is impossible to be certain, but when John’s account is compared to the synoptics it is easier to reconcile the accounts if four women were present than if there were only three. It also seems that if there were four women present, this would have been seen by the author to be in juxtaposition to the four soldiers present who performed the crucifixion, and this may explain the transition from the one incident in 23-24 to the other in 25-27. Finally, if only three were present, this would mean that both Jesus’ mother and her sister were named Mary, and this is highly improbable in a Jewish family of that time. If there were four women present, the name of the second, the sister of Jesus’ mother, is not mentioned. It is entirely possible that the sister of Jesus’ mother mentioned here is to be identified with the woman named Salome mentioned in Mark 15:40 and also with the woman identified as “the mother of the sons of Zebedee” mentioned in Matt 27:56. If so, and if John the Apostle is to be identified as the beloved disciple, then the reason for the omission of the second woman’s name becomes clear; she would have been John’s own mother, and he consistently omitted direct reference to himself or his brother James or any other members of his family in the Fourth Gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n4301979"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301979">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>Woman</i> is Jesus’ normal, polite way of addressing women (Matt 15:28, Luke 13:12; John 4:21; 8:10; 19:26; 20:15; see BDAG 208-9 s.v. <span class="greek">γυνή</span> 1). But it <i>is</i> unusual for a son to address his mother with this term. The custom in both Hebrew (or Aramaic) and Greek would be for a son to use a qualifying adjective or title. Is there significance in Jesus’ use here? Jesus probably used the term here to help establish Mary and the beloved disciple in a new “mother-son” relationship. Someone would soon need to provide for Mary since Jesus, her oldest son, would no longer be alive. By using this term Jesus distanced himself from Mary so the beloved disciple could take his place as her earthly son (cf. John 2:4). See D. A. Carson, <i>John</i>, 617-18, for discussion about symbolic interpretations of this relationship between Mary and the beloved disciple.</p></p>
<p id="n4301980"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301980">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from that very hour.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301981"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301981">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “that already.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301982"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301982">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “finished,” “accomplished”; <i>Grk</i> “fulfilled.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301983"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301983">83</a> <p><b>sn</b> A reference to Ps 69:21 or Ps 22:15.</p></p>
<p id="n4301984"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301984">84</a> <p><b>sn</b> In order <i>to fulfill</i> (<span class="greek">τελειωθῇ</span> [<span class="translit">teleiōthē</span>], a wordplay on the previous statement that <i>everything was completed</i> [<span class="greek">τετέλεσται</span>, <span class="translit">tetelestai</span>]) <i>the scripture</i>, he said, “<i>I am thirsty</i>.” The scripture referred to is probably Ps 69:21, “They also gave me gall for my food, and for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.” Also suggested, however, is Ps 22:15, “My tongue cleaves to the roof of my mouth, and you [God] lay me in the dust of death.” Ps 22:1 reads “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?,” a statement Jesus makes from the cross in both Matt 27:46 and Mark 15:34. In light of the connection in the Fourth Gospel between thirst and the living water which Jesus offers, it is highly ironic that here Jesus himself, the source of that living water, expresses his thirst. And since 7:39 associates the living water with the Holy Spirit, Jesus’ statement here in 19:28 amounts to an admission that at this point he has been forsaken by God (cf. Ps 22:1, Matt 27:46, and Mark 15:34).</p></p>
<p id="n4301985"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301985">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> The cheap <i>sour wine</i> was called in Latin <i>posca</i>, and referred to a cheap vinegar wine diluted heavily with water. It was the drink of slaves and soldiers, and was probably there for the soldiers who had performed the crucifixion.</p></p>
<p id="n4301986"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301986">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Hyssop</i> was a small aromatic bush; exact identification of the plant is uncertain. The hyssop used to lift the wet sponge may have been a form of reed (<span class="greek">κάλαμος</span>, <span class="translit">kalamos</span>, “reed,” is used in Matt 27:48 and Mark 15:36); the biblical name can refer to several different species of plant (at least eighteen different plants have been suggested).</p></p>
<p id="n4301987"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301987">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and brought it.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301988"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301988">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then when.” Here <span class="greek">οὖν</span> (<span class="translit">oun</span>) has not been translated for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n4301989"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301989">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “It is accomplished,” “It is finished,” or “It is ended.” See <b>tn</b> on John 13:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4301990"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301990">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “he bowed his head and died”; <i>Grk</i> “he bowed his head and gave over the spirit.”</p></p>
<p id="n4301991"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301991">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Jewish authorities, because this was the day of preparation for the <i>Sabbath</i> and the Passover (cf. 19:14), requested Pilate to order the legs of the three who had been crucified to be broken. This would hasten their deaths, so that the bodies could be removed before the beginning of the Sabbath at 6 p.m. This was based on the law of Deut 21:22-23 and Josh 8:29 that specified the bodies of executed criminals who had been hanged on a tree should not remain there overnight. According to Josephus this law was interpreted in the 1st century to cover the bodies of those who had been crucified (<i>J. W</i>. 4.5.2 [4.317]). Philo of Alexandria also mentions that on occasion, especially at festivals, the bodies were taken down and given to relatives to bury (<i>Flaccus</i> 10 [83]). The normal Roman practice would have been to leave the bodies on the crosses, to serve as a warning to other would-be offenders.</p></p>
<p id="n4301992"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301992">92</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4301993"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301993">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” Here the phrase refers to the Jewish leaders. See also the note on the phrase “Jewish leaders” in v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n4301994"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301994">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “asked Pilate that the legs of them might be broken.” The referent of “them” (the three individuals who were crucified, collectively referred to as “the victims”) has been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4301995"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301995">95</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To have the legs…broken</i>. Breaking the legs of a crucified person was a way of speeding up his death, since the victim could no longer use his legs to push upward in order to be able to draw a breath. This breaking of the legs was called in Latin <i>crurifragium</i>, and was done with a heavy mallet.</p></p>
<p id="n4301996"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301996">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “asked Pilate that their legs might be broken and they might be taken down.” Here because of the numerous ambiguous third person references it is necessary to clarify that it was the crucified men whose legs were to be broken and whose corpses were to be removed from the crosses.</p></p>
<p id="n4301997"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301997">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Crucify</i> in 19:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4301998"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301998">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4301999"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n4301999">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “broke the legs of the first and of the other who had been crucified with him.”</p></p>
<p id="n43019100"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019100">100</a> <p><b>sn</b> If it was obvious to the soldiers that the victim was already dead it is difficult to see why one of them would try to inflict a wound. The Greek verb <i>pierced</i> (<span class="greek">νύσσω</span>, <span class="translit">nussō</span>) can indicate anything from a slight prod to a mortal wound. Probably one of the soldiers gave an exploratory stab to see if the body would jerk. If not, he was really dead. This thrust was hard enough to penetrate the side, since the author states that <i>blood and water flowed out immediately</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n43019101"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019101">101</a> <p><b>sn</b> How is the reference to the <i>blood and water</i> that flowed out from Jesus’ side to be understood? This is probably to be connected with the statements in 1 John 5:6-8. In both passages <i>water</i>, <i>blood</i>, and <i>testimony</i> are mentioned. The Spirit is also mentioned in 1 John 5:7 as the source of the testimony, while here the testimony comes from one of the disciples (19:35). The connection between the Spirit and the living water with Jesus’ statement of thirst just before he died in the preceding context has already been noted (see 19:28). For the author, the water which flowed out of Jesus’ side was a symbolic reference to the Holy Spirit who could now be given because Jesus was now glorified (cf. 7:39); Jesus had now departed and returned to that glory which he had with the Father before the creation of the world (cf. 17:5). The mention of <i>blood</i> recalls the motif of the Passover lamb as a sacrificial victim. Later references to sacrificial procedures in the Mishnah appear to support this: <i>m. Pesahim</i> 5:3 and 5:5 state that the blood of the sacrificial animal should not be allowed to congeal but should flow forth freely at the instant of death so that it could be used for sprinkling; <i>m. Tamid</i> 4:2 actually specifies that the priest is to pierce the heart of the sacrificial victim and cause the blood to come forth.</p></p>
<p id="n43019102"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “it” is not in the Greek text but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n43019103"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and that one.”</p></p>
<p id="n43019104"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019104">104</a> <p><b>sn</b> A parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n43019105"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019105">105</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 12:46, Num 9:12, and Ps 34:20. A number of different OT passages lie behind this quotation: Exod 12:10 LXX, Exod 12:46, Num 9:12, or Ps 34:20. Of these, the first is the closest in form to the quotation here. The first three are all more likely candidates than the last, since the first three all deal with descriptions of the Passover lamb.</p></p>
<p id="n43019106"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019106">106</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Zech 12:10. Here a single phrase is quoted from Zech 12, but the entire context is associated with the events surrounding the crucifixion. The “Spirit of grace and of supplication” is poured out on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the first part of v. 10. A few verses later in 13:1 Yahweh (typically rendered as “Lord” in the OT) says “In that day a fountain will be opened for the house of David and for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for impurity.” The blood which flowed from Jesus’ pierced side may well be what the author saw as the connection here, since as the shedding of the blood of the sacrificial victim it represents cleansing from sin. Although the Jewish authorities and Roman soldiers certainly “<i>looked on the one whom they have pierced</i>” as he hung on the cross, the author may also have in mind the <i>parousia</i> (second coming) here. The context in Zech 12-14 is certainly the second coming, so that these who crucified Jesus will look upon him in another sense when he returns in judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n43019107"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Jewish authorities”; <i>Grk</i> “the Jews.” Here the phrase refers to the Jewish leaders, especially the Pharisees (see John 12:42). See also the note on the phrase “Jewish leaders” in v. 7.</p></p>
<p id="n43019108"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019108">108</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n43019109"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Pilate.” The conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”) has not been translated here in keeping with the tendency of contemporary English style to use shorter sentences.</p></p>
<p id="n43019110"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “took away his body.”</p></p>
<p id="n43019111"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n43019112"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019112">112</a> <p><b>sn</b> See John 3:1-21.</p></p>
<p id="n43019113"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “came”; the words “accompanied Joseph” are not in the Greek text but are supplied for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n43019114"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019114">114</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Aloes</i> refers to an aromatic resin from a plant similar to a lily, used for embalming a corpse.</p></p>
<p id="n43019115"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019115">115</a> <p><b>sn</b> The Roman pound (<span class="greek">λίτρα</span>, <span class="translit">litra</span>) weighed twelve ounces or 325 grams. Thus 100 Roman pounds would be about 32.5 kilograms or 75 pounds.</p></p>
<p id="n43019116"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term see BDAG 140-41 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄρωμα</span>. The Jews did not practice embalming, so these materials were used to cover the stench of decay and slow decomposition.</p></p>
<p id="n43019117"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Fourth Gospel uses <span class="greek">ὀθονίοις</span> (<span class="translit">othoniois</span>) to describe the wrappings, and this has caused a good deal of debate, since it appears to contradict the synoptic accounts which mention a <span class="greek">σινδών</span> (<span class="translit">sindōn</span>), a large single piece of linen cloth. If one understands <span class="greek">ὀθονίοις</span> to refer to smaller strips of cloth, like bandages, there would be a difference, but diminutive forms have often lost their diminutive force in Koine Greek (BDF §111.3), so there may not be any difference. Also, Luke uses both terms to refer to the wrappings, which suggests they are interchangeable in some contexts at least (Luke 23:53; 24:12).</p></p>
<p id="n43019118"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “cloth as is the custom of the Jews to prepare for burial.”</p></p>
<p id="n43019119"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n43019120"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019120">120</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Crucify</i> in 19:6.</p></p>
<p id="n43019121"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “an orchard.”</p></p>
<p id="n43019122"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “orchard.”</p></p>
<p id="n43019123"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “been placed.”</p></p>
<p id="n43019124"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019124">124</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>day of preparation</i> was the day before the Sabbath when everything had to be prepared for it, as no work could be done on the Sabbath.</p></p>
<p id="n43019125"><a href="file1059.xhtml#n43019125">125</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The tomb was nearby</i>. The Passover and the Sabbath would begin at 6 p.m., so those who had come to prepare and bury the body could not afford to waste time.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
