<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 1 Corinthians 16</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>1 Corinthians<br />Chapter 16</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">A Collection to Aid Jewish Christians</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:1</span> With regard to the collection for the saints, please follow the directions that I gave to the churches of Galatia:<sup><a id="n460161" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n460161">1</a></sup> <span class="verse">16:2</span> On the first day of the week, each of you should set aside some income<sup><a id="n460162" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n460162">2</a></sup> and save<sup><a id="n460163" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n460163">3</a></sup> it to the extent that God has blessed you,<sup><a id="n460164" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n460164">4</a></sup> so that a collection will not have to be made<sup><a id="n460165" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n460165">5</a></sup> when I come. <span class="verse">16:3</span> Then, when I arrive, I will send those whom you approve with letters of explanation to carry your gift to Jerusalem. <span class="verse">16:4</span> And if it seems advisable that I should go also, they will go with me. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Paul’s Plans to Visit</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:5</span> But I will come to you after I have gone through Macedonia—for I will be going through Macedonia— <span class="verse">16:6</span> and perhaps I will stay with you, or even spend the winter, so that you can send me on my journey, wherever I go. <span class="verse">16:7</span> For I do not want to see you now in passing, since I hope to spend some time with you, if the Lord allows. <span class="verse">16:8</span> But I will stay in Ephesus until Pentecost, <span class="verse">16:9</span> because a door of great opportunity stands wide open for me,<sup><a id="n460168" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n460168">8</a></sup> but there are many opponents. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:10</span> Now if Timothy comes, see that he has nothing to fear among you, for he is doing the Lord’s work, as I am too. <span class="verse">16:11</span> So then, let no one treat him with contempt. But send him on his way in peace so that he may come to me. For I am expecting him with the brothers.<sup><a id="n460169" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n460169">9</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:12</span> With regard to our brother Apollos: I strongly encouraged him to visit you with the other brothers,<sup><a id="n4601610" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601610">10</a></sup> but it was simply not his intention to come now.<sup><a id="n4601611" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601611">11</a></sup> He will come when he has the opportunity. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Final Challenge and Blessing</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:13</span> Stay alert, stand firm in the faith, show courage, be strong. <span class="verse">16:14</span> Everything you do should be done in love. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:15</span> Now, brothers and sisters,<sup><a id="n4601612" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601612">12</a></sup> you know about the household of Stephanus, that as the first converts<sup><a id="n4601613" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601613">13</a></sup> of Achaia, they devoted themselves to ministry for the saints. I urge you <span class="verse">16:16</span> also to submit to people like this, and to everyone who cooperates in the work and labors hard. <span class="verse">16:17</span> I was glad about the arrival of Stephanus, Fortunatus, and Achaicus because they have supplied the fellowship with you that I lacked.<sup><a id="n4601614" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601614">14</a></sup> <span class="verse">16:18</span> For they refreshed my spirit and yours. So then, recognize people like this. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:19</span> The churches in the province of Asia<sup><a id="n4601615" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601615">15</a></sup> send greetings to you. Aquila and Prisca<sup><a id="n4601616" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601616">16</a></sup> greet<sup><a id="n4601617" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601617">17</a></sup> you warmly in the Lord, with the church that meets in their house. <span class="verse">16:20</span> All the brothers and sisters<sup><a id="n4601618" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601618">18</a></sup> send greetings. Greet one another with a holy kiss. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:21</span> I, Paul, send this greeting with my own hand. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:22</span> Let anyone who has no love for the Lord be accursed. Our Lord, come!<sup><a id="n4601619" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601619">19</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:23</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">16:24</span> My love be with all of you in Christ Jesus.<sup><a id="n4601620" href="file1124_notes.xhtml#n4601620">20</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>