<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 15</h2>
<p id="n420151"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n420151">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>tax collectors</i> in 3:12.</p></p>
<p id="n420152"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n420152">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “were drawing near.” </p></p>
<p id="n420153"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n420153">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n420154"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n420154">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n420155"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n420155">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n420156"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n420156">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “grumbling”; <i>Grk</i> “were complaining, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n420157"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n420157">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “accepts,” “receives.” This is not the first time this issue has been raised: Luke 5:27-32; 7:37-50.</p></p>
<p id="n420158"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n420158">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that Jesus’ telling of the parable is in response to the complaints of the Pharisees and experts in the law. </p></p>
<p id="n420159"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n420159">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201510"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201510">10</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Them</i> means at the minimum the parable is for the leadership, but probably also for those people Jesus accepted, but the leaders regarded as outcasts.</p></p>
<p id="n4201511"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “parable, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4201512"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “What man.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used here in a somewhat generic sense.</p></p>
<p id="n4201513"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201513">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> This individual with <i>a hundred sheep</i> is a shepherd of modest means, as flocks often had up to two hundred head of sheep.</p></p>
<p id="n4201514"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert,” but here such a translation might suggest neglect of the 99 sheep left behind.</p></p>
<p id="n4201515"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “go after,” but in contemporary English the idiom “to look for” is used to express this.</p></p>
<p id="n4201516"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201516">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Until he finds it</i>. The parable pictures God’s pursuit of the sinner. On the image of Jesus as the Good Shepherd, see John 10:1-18.</p></p>
<p id="n4201517"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201518"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And coming into his…” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201519"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201519">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> A touch of drama may be present, as the term <i>calls together</i> can mean a formal celebration (1 Kgs 1:9-10).</p></p>
<p id="n4201520"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the”; in context the article is used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215). It occurs before “neighbors” as well (“his friends and his neighbors”) but has not been translated the second time because of English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201521"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201521">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>There will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents</i>. The pursuit of the sinner is a priority in spite of the presence of others who are doing well (see also Luke 5:32; 19:10). The theme of repentance, a major Lukan theme, is again emphasized.</p></p>
<p id="n4201522"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201522">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δικαίοις</span> (<span class="translit">dikaiois</span>) is an adjective functioning substantivally and has been translated “righteous people.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201523"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201523">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who do not need to repent”; <i>Grk</i> “who do not have need of repentance.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201524"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201524">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>silver coin</i> is a drachma, equal to a denarius, that is, a day’s pay for the average laborer.</p></p>
<p id="n4201525"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201525">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “What woman who has ten silver coins, if she loses.” The initial participle <span class="greek">ἔχουσα</span> (<span class="translit">echousa</span>) has been translated as a finite verb parallel to <span class="greek">ἀπολέσῃ</span> (<span class="translit">apolesē</span>) in the conditional clause to improve the English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201526"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “one coin.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201527"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and sweep,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4201528"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201528">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201529"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the”; in context the article is used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n4201530"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201530">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Rejoice</i>. Besides the theme of pursuing the lost, the other theme of the parable is the joy of finding them.</p></p>
<p id="n4201531"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201531">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “drachma.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201532"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201532">32</a> <p><b>sn</b> The whole of heaven is said to rejoice. <i>Joy in the presence of God’s angels</i> is a way of referring to God’s joy as well without having to name him explicitly. Contemporary Judaism tended to refer to God indirectly where possible out of reverence or respect for the divine name.</p></p>
<p id="n4201533"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201534"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201534">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201535"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201536"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201536">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the”; in context the article is used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n4201537"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201537">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 57.19 notes that in nonbiblical contexts in which the word <span class="greek">οὐσία</span> (<span class="translit">ousia</span>) occurs, it refers to considerable possessions or wealth, thus “estate.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201538"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 57.3, “to belong to or come to belong to, with the possible implication of by right or by inheritance.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201539"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201539">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the father’s response to the younger son’s request. </p></p>
<p id="n4201540"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201540">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the”; in context the article is used as a possessive pronoun (<i>ExSyn</i> 215).</p></p>
<p id="n4201541"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201541">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He divided his assets between them</i>. There was advice against doing this in the OT Apocrypha (Sir 33:20). The younger son would get half of what the older son received (Deut 21:17).</p></p>
<p id="n4201542"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201542">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201543"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201543">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “after not many days.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201544"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201544">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “wasted.” This verb is graphic; it means to scatter (L&amp;N 57.151).</p></p>
<p id="n4201545"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201545">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “estate” (the same word has been translated “estate” in v. 12).</p></p>
<p id="n4201546"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201546">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the sequence of events in the parable. Greek style often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” but English style generally does not.</p></p>
<p id="n4201547"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201547">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “joined himself to” (in this case an idiom for beginning to work for someone).</p></p>
<p id="n4201548"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201548">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he.” Here the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) and the personal pronoun have been translated by a relative pronoun to improve the English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201549"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201549">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> To a Jew, being sent to the field <i>to feed pigs</i> would be an insult, since pigs were considered unclean animals (Lev 11:7).</p></p>
<p id="n4201550"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201550">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201551"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201551">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “would gladly have eaten”; <i>Grk</i> “was longing to be filled with.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201552"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201552">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term refers to the edible pods from a carob tree (BDAG 540 s.v. <span class="greek">κεράτιον</span>). They were bean-like in nature and were commonly used for fattening pigs, although they were also used for food by poor people (L&amp;N 3.46).</p></p>
<p id="n4201553"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201553">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201554"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201554">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “came to himself” (an idiom).</p></p>
<p id="n4201555"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201555">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “bread,” but used figuratively for food of any kind (L&amp;N 5.1).</p></p>
<p id="n4201556"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201556">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> In the confession “<i>I have sinned</i>” there is a recognition of wrong that pictures the penitent coming home and “being found.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201557"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201557">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>against heaven</i> is a circumlocution for God.</p></p>
<p id="n4201558"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201558">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to BDAG 342 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐνωπιον</span> 4.a, “<i>in relation to</i> <span class="greek">ἁμαρτάνειν ἐ</span>.<span class="greek"> τινος</span> <i>sin against someone</i> Lk 15:18, 21 (cp. Jdth 5:17; 1 Km 7:6; 20:1).”</p></p>
<p id="n4201559"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201559">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “make me.” Here is a sign of total humility.</p></p>
<p id="n4201560"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201560">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the result of the son’s decision to return home. Greek style often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” but English style generally does not.</p></p>
<p id="n4201561"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201561">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a long way off from [home].” The word “home” is implied (L&amp;N 85.16).</p></p>
<p id="n4201562"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201562">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “felt great affection for him,” “felt great pity for him.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The major figure of the parable, the forgiving <i>father</i>, represents God the Father and his compassionate response. God is ready with open arms to welcome the sinner who comes back to him.</p></p>
<p id="n4201563"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201563">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he fell on his neck,” an idiom for showing special affection for someone by throwing one’s arms around them. The picture is of the father hanging on the son’s neck in welcome.</p></p>
<p id="n4201564"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201564">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (the son) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201565"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201565">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4201566"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201566">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>against heaven</i> is a circumlocution for God. 1st century Judaism tended to minimize use of the divine name out of reverence.</p></p>
<p id="n4201567"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201567">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> The younger son launches into his confession just as he had planned. See vv. 18-19.</p></p>
<p id="n4201568"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201568">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 7:2.</p></p>
<p id="n4201569"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201569">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> With the instructions <i>Hurry! Bring the best robe</i>, there is a total acceptance of the younger son back into the home.</p></p>
<p id="n4201570"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201570">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “hand,” but <span class="greek">χείρ</span> (<span class="translit">cheir</span>) can refer to either the whole hand or any relevant part of it (L&amp;N 8.30).</p></p>
<p id="n4201571"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201571">71</a> <p><b>sn</b> The need for <i>sandals</i> underlines the younger son’s previous destitution, because he was barefoot.</p></p>
<p id="n4201572"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201572">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And bring.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4201573"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201573">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the prize calf” (L&amp;N 65.8). See also L&amp;N 44.2, “grain-fattened.” Such a calf was usually reserved for religious celebrations.</p></p>
<p id="n4201574"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201574">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">φαγόντες</span> (<span class="translit">phagontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201575"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201575">75</a> <p><b>sn</b> This statement links the parable to the theme of 15:6, 9.</p></p>
<p id="n4201576"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201576">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the result of the father’s remarks in the preceding verses.</p></p>
<p id="n4201577"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201577">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And as.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4201578"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201578">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> This would have been primarily instrumental <i>music</i>, but might include singing as well.</p></p>
<p id="n4201579"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201579">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the result of the older son hearing the noise of the celebration in progress.</p></p>
<p id="n4201580"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201580">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here, <span class="greek">παῖς</span> (<span class="translit">pais</span>), describes a slave, possibly a household servant regarded with some affection (L&amp;N 87.77).</p></p>
<p id="n4201581"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201581">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he said to him.” Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated. The rest of the phrase has been simplified to “the slave replied,” with the referent (the slave) specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201582"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201582">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> See note on the phrase “fattened calf” in v. 23.</p></p>
<p id="n4201583"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201583">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (the younger son) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201584"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201584">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the older son, v. 25) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201585"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201585">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> The aorist verb <span class="greek">ὠργίσθη</span> (<span class="translit">ōrgisthē</span>) has been translated as an ingressive aorist, reflecting entry into a state or condition.</p></p>
<p id="n4201586"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201586">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> Ironically the attitude of the older son has left him outside and without joy. </p></p>
<p id="n4201587"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201587">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but answering, he said.” This is somewhat redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified to “but he answered.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201588"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201588">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or simply, “have served,” but in the emotional context of the older son’s outburst the translation given is closer to the point.</p></p>
<p id="n4201589"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201589">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “yet” to bring out the contrast indicated by the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4201590"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201590">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>You never gave me even a goat</i>. The older son’s complaint was that the generous treatment of the younger son was not fair: “I can’t get even a little celebration with a basic food staple like a goat!”</p></p>
<p id="n4201591"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201591">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note the younger son is not “my brother” but <i>this son of yours</i> (an expression with a distinctly pejorative nuance).</p></p>
<p id="n4201592"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201592">92</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is another graphic description. The younger son’s consumption had been like a glutton. He had both figuratively and literally <i>devoured</i> the assets which were given to him.</p></p>
<p id="n4201593"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201593">93</a> <p><b>sn</b> The charge concerning the <i>prostitutes</i> is unproven, but essentially the older brother accuses the father of committing an injustice by rewarding his younger son’s unrighteous behavior.</p></p>
<p id="n4201594"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201594">94</a> <p><b>sn</b> See note on the phrase “fattened calf” in v. 23.</p></p>
<p id="n4201595"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201595">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events in the parable.</p></p>
<p id="n4201596"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201596">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the father) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4201597"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201597">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “necessary.”</p></p>
<p id="n4201598"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201598">98</a> <p><b>sn</b> By referring to him as <i>your brother</i>, the father reminded the older brother that the younger brother was part of the family.</p></p>
<p id="n4201599"><a href="file1030.xhtml#n4201599">99</a> <p><b>sn</b> The theme <i>he was lost and is found</i> is repeated from v. 24. The conclusion is open-ended. The reader is left to ponder with the older son (who pictures the scribes and Pharisees) what the response will be. The parable does not reveal the ultimate response of the older brother. Jesus argued that sinners should be pursued and received back warmly when they returned.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
