<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Timothy 3</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Timothy<br />Chapter 3</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Ministry in the Last Days</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:1</span> But understand this, that in the last days difficult<sup><a id="n550031" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n550031">1</a></sup> times will come. <span class="verse">3:2</span> For people<sup><a id="n550032" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n550032">2</a></sup> will be lovers of themselves,<sup><a id="n550033" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n550033">3</a></sup> lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, unholy, <span class="verse">3:3</span> unloving, irreconcilable, slanderers, without self-control, savage, opposed to what is good, <span class="verse">3:4</span> treacherous, reckless, conceited, loving pleasure rather than loving God. <span class="verse">3:5</span> They will maintain the outward appearance<sup><a id="n550034" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n550034">4</a></sup> of religion but will have repudiated its power. So avoid people like these.<sup><a id="n550035" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n550035">5</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:6</span> For some of these insinuate themselves<sup><a id="n550036" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n550036">6</a></sup> into households and captivate weak women<sup><a id="n550037" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n550037">7</a></sup> who are overwhelmed with sins and led along by various passions. <span class="verse">3:7</span> Such women are always seeking instruction,<sup><a id="n550038" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n550038">8</a></sup> yet never able to arrive at a knowledge of the truth. <span class="verse">3:8</span> And just as Jannes and Jambres<sup><a id="n550039" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n550039">9</a></sup> opposed Moses, so these people—who have warped minds and are disqualified in the faith<sup><a id="n5500310" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500310">10</a></sup> —also oppose the truth. <span class="verse">3:9</span> But they will not go much further,<sup><a id="n5500311" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500311">11</a></sup> for their foolishness will be obvious to everyone, just like it was with Jannes and Jambres.<sup><a id="n5500312" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500312">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Continue in What You Have Learned</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">3:10</span> You, however,<sup><a id="n5500313" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500313">13</a></sup> have followed my teaching, my<sup><a id="n5500314" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500314">14</a></sup> way of life, my purpose, my faith, my patience, my love, my endurance, <span class="verse">3:11</span> as well as the persecutions and sufferings<sup><a id="n5500315" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500315">15</a></sup> that happened to me in Antioch, in Iconium, and in Lystra.<sup><a id="n5500317" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500317">17</a></sup> I endured these persecutions and the Lord delivered me from them all. <span class="verse">3:12</span> Now in fact all who want to live godly lives in Christ Jesus will be persecuted. <span class="verse">3:13</span> But evil people and charlatans will go from bad to worse,<sup><a id="n5500318" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500318">18</a></sup> deceiving others and being deceived themselves.<sup><a id="n5500319" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500319">19</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:14</span> You, however, must continue<sup><a id="n5500320" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500320">20</a></sup> in the things you have learned and are confident about. You know<sup><a id="n5500321" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500321">21</a></sup> who taught you<sup><a id="n5500322" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500322">22</a></sup> <span class="verse">3:15</span> and how from infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to give you wisdom for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. <span class="verse">3:16</span> Every scripture<sup><a id="n5500323" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500323">23</a></sup> is inspired by God<sup><a id="n5500324" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500324">24</a></sup> and useful for teaching, for reproof,<sup><a id="n5500325" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500325">25</a></sup> for correction, and for training in righteousness, <span class="verse">3:17</span> that the person dedicated to God<sup><a id="n5500326" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500326">26</a></sup> may be capable<sup><a id="n5500327" href="file1183_notes.xhtml#n5500327">27</a></sup> and equipped for every good work. </p>

</body>
</html>