<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Zechariah 10</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Zechariah<br />Chapter 10</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The Restoration of the True People</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:1</span> Ask the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> for rain in the season of the late spring rains<sup><a id="n380101" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n380101">1</a></sup> —the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> who causes thunderstorms—and he will give everyone showers of rain and green growth in the field. <span class="verse">10:2</span> For the household gods<sup><a id="n380102" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n380102">2</a></sup> have spoken wickedness, the soothsayers have seen a lie, and the dreamers have disclosed emptiness and give comfort in vain. Therefore the people set out like sheep and become scattered because they have no shepherd.<sup><a id="n380103" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n380103">3</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:3</span> “I am enraged at the shepherds and will punish the lead goats.</p>
<p class="bodytext">“For the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> of Heaven’s Armies has brought blessing to his flock, the house of Judah, and will transform them into his majestic warhorse. <span class="verse">10:4</span> From him will come the cornerstone,<sup><a id="n380104" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n380104">4</a></sup> the wall peg,<sup><a id="n380105" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n380105">5</a></sup> the battle bow, and every ruler.<sup><a id="n380106" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n380106">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">10:5</span> And they will be like warriors trampling the mud of the streets in battle. They will fight, for the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> will be with them, and will defeat the enemy cavalry.<sup><a id="n380107" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n380107">7</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">10:6</span> “I (says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>) will strengthen the kingdom<sup><a id="n380108" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n380108">8</a></sup> of Judah and deliver the people of Joseph<sup><a id="n380109" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n380109">9</a></sup> and will bring them back<sup><a id="n3801010" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n3801010">10</a></sup> because of my compassion for them. They will be as though I had never rejected them, for I am the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span> their God, and therefore I will hear them. <span class="verse">10:7</span> The Ephraimites will be like warriors and will rejoice as if they had drunk wine. Their children will see it and rejoice; they will celebrate in the things of the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. <span class="verse">10:8</span> I will signal for them and gather them, for I have already redeemed them; then they will become as numerous as they were before. <span class="verse">10:9</span> Though I scatter<sup><a id="n3801011" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n3801011">11</a></sup> them among the nations, they will remember in far-off places—they and their children will survive and return. <span class="verse">10:10</span> I will bring them back from Egypt and gather them from Assyria.<sup><a id="n3801012" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n3801012">12</a></sup> I will bring them to the lands of Gilead and Lebanon, and there will not be enough room for them. <span class="verse">10:11</span> The <span class="smcaps">Lord</span><sup><a id="n3801013" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n3801013">13</a></sup> will cross the sea of storms and will calm its turbulence. The depths of the Nile will dry up, the pride of Assyria will be humbled, and the domination<sup><a id="n3801014" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n3801014">14</a></sup> of Egypt will be no more. <span class="verse">10:12</span> Thus I will strengthen them by my power,<sup><a id="n3801015" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n3801015">15</a></sup> and they will walk about<sup><a id="n3801016" href="file959_notes.xhtml#n3801016">16</a></sup> in my name,” says the <span class="smcaps">Lord</span>. </p>

</body>
</html>