<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Corinthians 2</h2>
<p id="n4700142"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700142">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “I call upon God as witness against my soul.” Normally this implies an appeal for help (L&amp;N 33.176).</p></p>
<p id="n4700143"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700143">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">φειδόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">pheidomenos</span>) has been translated as a telic participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4700144"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700144">44</a> <p><b>sn</b> Paul had promised to <i>come again</i> to visit (see 2 Cor 1:15, 24) but explains here why he had changed his plans.</p></p>
<p id="n4700145"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700145">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because you stand firm in the faith.”</p></p>
<p id="n470021"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n470021">1</a> <p><b>tc</b> Although usually <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>, “now”; found in <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C D<sup>1</sup> F G <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 0285 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat) should take precedent over <span class="greek">γάρ</span> (<span class="translit">gar</span>) in textually disputed places in the <i>corpus Paulinum</i>, the credentials for <span class="greek">γάρ</span> here are not easily dismissed (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> B 0223 0243 33 1739 1881 <i>al</i>); here it is the preferred reading, albeit slightly.</p></p>
<p id="n470022"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n470022">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I decided this for myself.”</p></p>
<p id="n470023"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n470023">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “not to come to you again in sorrow.”</p><p><b>sn</b> Paul was not speaking absolutely about not making another <i>visit</i>, but meant he did not want to come to the Corinthians again until the conflict he mentioned in 2 Cor 2:4-11 was settled.</p></p>
<p id="n470024"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n470024">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to cheer me up.” L&amp;N 25.131 translates this “For if I were to make you sad, who would be left to cheer me up?”</p></p>
<p id="n470025"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n470025">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to you” are not in the Greek text but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n470026"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n470026">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>So that when I came</i>. Regarding this still future visit by Paul, see 2 Cor 12:14; 13:1.</p></p>
<p id="n470027"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n470027">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the love that I have in great measure for you.”</p></p>
<p id="n470028"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n470028">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “(not to say too much)”; <i>Grk</i> “(not to burden you [with words]).”</p></p>
<p id="n470029"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n470029">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that on the other hand.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700210"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “him” is not in the Greek text but is supplied. Direct objects in Greek were often omitted and must be supplied from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4700211"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700211">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “comfort him, lest somehow such a person be swallowed up by excessive grief,” an idiom for a person being so overcome with grief as to despair or give up completely (L&amp;N 25.285). In this context of excessive grief or regret for past sins, “overwhelmed” is a good translation since contemporary English idiom speaks of someone “overwhelmed by grief.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence and the difficulty of expressing a negative purpose/result clause in English, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4700212"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700212">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I urge you to show that your love for him is real.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700213"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “you” is not in the Greek text, but is implied (as an understood direct object).</p></p>
<p id="n4700214"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to know the proof of you,” that is, to know if the Corinthians’ obedience to Paul as an apostle was genuine (L&amp;N 72.7).</p></p>
<p id="n4700215"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “be taken advantage of.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700216"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700216">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Troas</i> was a city and region in the northwest corner of Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4700217"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> This has been translated as a concessive participle (“even though”). The passive construction (“a door of opportunity had been opened for me by the Lord”) has been converted to an active one in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4700218"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700218">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a door”; the phrase <span class="greek">ἀνοίγω θύραν</span> (<span class="translit">anoigō thuran</span>, “to open a door”) is an idiom meaning “to make possible some opportunity” (L&amp;N 71.9).</p></p>
<p id="n4700219"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700219">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I had no peace of mind.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700220"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700220">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “I took my leave of them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700221"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Since this refers to the outset of a journey, the aorist <span class="greek">ἐξῆλθον</span> (<span class="translit">exēlthon</span>) is taken ingressively.</p></p>
<p id="n4700222"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700222">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who always causes us to triumph.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700223"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the Messiah.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700224"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who reveals.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700225"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700225">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> The same Greek word (<span class="greek">ὀσμή</span>, <span class="translit">osmē</span>) translated “odor” here (in relation to the stench of death) has been translated “fragrance” in 2:14 and in the next phrase of the present verse. The word itself can describe a smell or odor either agreeable or disagreeable depending on the context (L&amp;N 79.45).</p></p>
<p id="n4700226"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700226">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>These things</i> refer to the things Paul is doing in his apostolic ministry.</p></p>
<p id="n4700227"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700227">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">καπηλεύοντες</span> (<span class="translit">kapēleuontes</span>) refers to those engaged in retail business, but with the negative connotations of deceptiveness and greed—“to peddle for profit,” “to huckster” (L&amp;N 57.202). In the translation a noun form (“hucksters”) has been used in combination with the English verb “peddle…for profit” to convey the negative connotations of this term.</p></p>
<p id="n4700228"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700228">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in the presence of.”</p></p>
<p id="n4700229"><a href="file1127.xhtml#n4700229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “persons of pure motives.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
