<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 9</h2>
<p id="n440091"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n440091">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Saul, making dire threats.”</p></p>
<p id="n440092"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n440092">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression “breathing out threats and murder” is an idiomatic expression for “making threats to murder” (see L&amp;N 33.293). Although the two terms “threats” and “murder” are syntactically coordinate, the second is semantically subordinate to the first. In other words, the content of the threats is to murder the disciples.</p></p>
<p id="n440093"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n440093">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n440094"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n440094">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression “the way” in ancient religious literature refers at times to “the whole way of life fr. a moral and spiritual viewpoint” (BDAG 692 s.v. <span class="greek">ὁδός</span> 3.c), and it has been so used of Christianity and its teachings in the book of Acts (see also 19:9, 23; 22:4; 24:14, 22). It is a variation of Judaism’s idea of two ways, the true and the false, where “<i>the Way</i>” is the true one (<i>1 En</i>. 91:18; <i>2 En</i>. 30:15).</p></p>
<p id="n440095"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n440095">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “bring them bound”; the translation “<i>bring someone as prisoner</i>” for <span class="greek">δεδεμένον ἄγειν τινά</span> (<span class="translit">dedemenon agein tina</span>) is given by BDAG 221 s.v. <span class="greek">δέω</span> 1.b.</p></p>
<p id="n440096"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n440096">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> From Damascus <i>to Jerusalem</i> was a six-day journey. Christianity had now expanded into Syria.</p></p>
<p id="n440097"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n440097">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “As he was going along, it happened that when he was approaching.” The phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n440098"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n440098">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “shone” (BDAG 799 s.v. <span class="greek">περιαστράπτω</span>). The light was more brilliant than the sun according to Acts 26:13.</p></p>
<p id="n440099"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n440099">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun.</p></p>
<p id="n4400910"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400910">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The double vocative suggests emotion.</p></p>
<p id="n4400911"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400911">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Persecuting me</i>. To persecute the church is to persecute Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4400912"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400912">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “But arise.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400913"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400913">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Literally a passive construction, “it will be told to you.” This has been converted to another form of passive construction in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4400914"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400914">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term here is <span class="greek">ἀνήρ</span> (<span class="translit">anēr</span>), which is used only rarely in a generic sense of both men and women. In the historical setting here, Paul’s traveling companions were almost certainly all males.</p></p>
<p id="n4400915"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400915">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, unable to speak because of fear or amazement. See BDAG 335 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐνεός</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4400916"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400916">16</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author. Acts 22:9 appears to indicate that they saw the light but did not hear a voice. They were “witnesses” that something happened.</p></p>
<p id="n4400917"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400917">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his eyes being open,” a genitive absolute construction that has been translated as a concessive adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4400918"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400918">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He could see nothing</i>. This sign of blindness, which was temporary until v. 18, is like the sign of muteness experienced by Zechariah in Luke 1. It allowed some time for Saul (Paul) to reflect on what had happened without distractions.</p></p>
<p id="n4400919"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400919">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referents (Saul’s companions) have been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400920"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400920">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And for.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400921"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400921">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “anything” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader. The fasting might indicate an initial realization of Luke 5:33-39. Fasting was usually accompanied by reflective thought.</p></p>
<p id="n4400922"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400922">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And the.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400923"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400923">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Lord</i> is directing all the events leading to the expansion of the gospel as he works on both sides of the meeting between Paul and Ananias. “The Lord” here refers to Jesus (see v. 17).</p></p>
<p id="n4400924"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400924">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “behold, I,” but this construction often means “here is/there is” (cf. BDAG 468 s.v. <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4400925"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400925">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> The noting of the detail of the locale, ironically <i>called ‘Straight’</i> Street, shows how directive and specific the Lord was.</p></p>
<p id="n4400926"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400926">26</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ The words <span class="greek">ἐν ὀράματι</span> (<span class="translit">en oramati</span>, “in a vision”) are not found in some of the earliest and best <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A 81 lat sa bo), but are implied from the context. The phrase is included, although sometimes in a different order with <span class="greek">ἄνδρα</span> (<span class="translit">andra</span>, “man”) or omitting <span class="greek">ἄνδρα</span> altogether, by B C E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 1175 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span>. The order of words in NA<sup>28</sup>, <span class="greek">ἄνδρα ἐν ὁράματι</span>, is supported only by B C 1175. Generally speaking, when there are three or more variants, with one an omission and the others involving rearrangements, the longer readings are later scribal additions. Further, the reading looks like a clarifying note, for an earlier vision is explicitly mentioned in v. 10. On the other hand, it is possible that some scribes deleted the words because of perceived repetition, though this is unlikely since it is a different vision two verses back. It is also possible that some scribes could have confused <span class="greek">ὁράματι</span> with <span class="greek">ὀνόματι</span> (<span class="translit">onomati</span>, “name”); <i>TCGNT</i> 319 notes that several <span class="smcaps">mss</span> place <span class="greek">ονόματι</span> before <span class="greek">᾿Ανανίαν</span> (<span class="translit">Ananian</span>, “Ananias”) while a few others drop <span class="greek">ὀνόματι</span> altogether. The Sahidic <span class="smcaps">mss</span> are among those that drop the word, however, and they also lack <span class="greek">ἐν ὁράματι</span>; all that is left is one version and father that drops <span class="greek">ὀνόματι</span>. Perhaps the best argument for the authenticity of the phrase is that B C 1175 preserve a rare, distinctively Lukan word order, but this is not nearly as harsh or unusual as what Luke does elsewhere. A decision is difficult in this case, but on balance the omission of the phrase seems to be authentic. The words are nevertheless added in the translation because of contextual considerations. NA<sup>28</sup> places the words in brackets, indicating doubts as to their authenticity. </p><p><b>sn</b> Apparently while in Damascus Paul had a subsequent <i>vision</i> in the midst of his blindness, fulfilling the prediction in 9:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4400927"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400927">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Ananias replied</i>. Past events might have suggested to Ananias that this was not good counsel, but like Peter in Acts 10, Ananias’ intuitions were wrong.</p></p>
<p id="n4400928"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400928">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “people” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4400929"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400929">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to bind.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400930"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400930">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression “those <i>who call on your name</i>” is a frequent description of believers (Acts 2:21; 1 Cor 1:2; Rom 10:13).</p></p>
<p id="n4400931"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400931">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “tool.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400932"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400932">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the sons of Israel.” In Acts, Paul is a minister to all nations, including Israel (Rom 1:16-17).</p></p>
<p id="n4400933"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400933">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “because of my name.” BDAG 1031 s.v. <span class="greek">ὑπέρ</span> 2 lists Acts 9:16 as an example of <span class="greek">ὑπέρ</span> (<span class="translit">huper</span>) used to indicate “the moving cause or reason, <i>because of, for the sake of, for</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400934"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400934">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and placing his hands on Saul, he said.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιθείς</span> (<span class="translit">epitheis</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. For the same reason <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated before the participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4400935"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400935">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on him”; the referent (Saul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400936"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400936">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on the road in which you came,” but the relative clause makes for awkward English style, so it was translated as a temporal clause (“as you came here”).</p></p>
<p id="n4400937"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400937">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Be filled with the Holy Spirit</i>. Here someone who is not an apostle (Ananias) commissions another person with the Spirit.</p></p>
<p id="n4400938"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400938">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And immediately.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400939"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400939">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> The comparison to “scales” suggests a crusty covering which peeled away (cf. BDAG 592 s.v. <span class="greek">λεπίς</span> 2).</p></p>
<p id="n4400940"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400940">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and he.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence was started, with “and” placed before the final element of the previous clause as required by English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400941"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400941">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened that for several days.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4400942"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400942">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 6:9.</p></p>
<p id="n4400943"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400943">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> The <span class="greek">ὅτι</span> (<span class="translit">hoti</span>) is understood to introduce direct (“This man is the Son of God”) rather than indirect discourse (“that this man is the Son of God”) because the pronoun <span class="greek">οὗτος</span> (<span class="translit">houtos</span>) combined with the present tense verb <span class="greek">ἐστιν</span> (<span class="translit">estin</span>) suggests the contents of what was proclaimed are a direct (albeit summarized) quotation.</p><p><b>sn</b> This is the only use of the title <i>Son of God</i> in Acts. The book prefers to allow a variety of descriptions to present Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4400944"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400944">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And all.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400945"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400945">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek interrogative particle used in this verse (<span class="greek">οὐχ</span>, <span class="translit">ouch</span>) expects a positive reply. They all knew about Saul’s persecutions.</p></p>
<p id="n4400946"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400946">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Normally, “destroying,” but compare 4 Macc 4:23; 11:4 and MM 529 s.v. <span class="greek">πορθέω</span> for examples from Koine papyri. See also BDAG 853 s.v. <span class="greek">πορθέω</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4400947"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400947">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “bring them bound”; the translation “<i>bring someone as prisoner</i>” for <span class="greek">δεδεμένον ἄγειν τινά</span> (<span class="translit">dedemenon agein tina</span>) is given by BDAG 221 s.v. <span class="greek">δέω</span> 1.b.</p></p>
<p id="n4400948"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400948">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “was becoming stronger,” but this could be understood in a physical sense, while the text refers to Saul’s growing ability to demonstrate to fellow Jews that Jesus was the Messiah. The translation “to become capable” for <span class="greek">ἐνδυναμόω</span> (<span class="translit">endunamoō</span>) is given in L&amp;N 74.7, with this specific verse as an example.</p></p>
<p id="n4400949"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400949">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “was confounding.” For the translation “to cause consternation” for <span class="greek">συγχέω</span> (<span class="translit">suncheō</span>) see L&amp;N 25.221.</p></p>
<p id="n4400950"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400950">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “by showing for certain.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400951"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400951">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “that this one”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400952"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400952">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.” Note again the variation in the titles used.</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:31.</p></p>
<p id="n4400953"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400953">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> Fitting the pattern emphasized earlier with Stephen and his speech in Acts 7, some Jews <i>plotted</i> to kill God’s messenger (cf. Luke 11:53-54).</p></p>
<p id="n4400954"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400954">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “against him” are implied, as suggested by L&amp;N 30.71.</p></p>
<p id="n4400955"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400955">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “guarding.” This is a negative term in Luke-Acts (Luke 6:7; 14:1; 20:20).</p></p>
<p id="n4400956"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400956">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word <span class="greek">πύλη</span> (<span class="translit">pulē</span>) may refer to a house door or gate, or to the large gates used in a palace, temple, or city wall. Here the context clearly indicates a reference to the latter, so the translation “city gates” is used.</p></p>
<p id="n4400957"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400957">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> The opening in the wall is not specifically mentioned here, but the parallel account in 2 Cor 11:33 mentions a “window” or “opening” (<span class="greek">θυρίς</span>, <span class="translit">thuris</span>) in the city wall through which Paul was lowered. One alternative to introducing mention of the opening is to translate Acts 9:25 “they let him down over the wall,” as suggested in L&amp;N 7.61. This option is not employed by many translations, however, because for the English reader it creates an (apparent) contradiction between Acts 9:25 and 2 Cor 11:33. In reality the account here is simply more general, omitting the detail about the window.</p></p>
<p id="n4400958"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400958">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term for “basket” used here, see BDAG 940 s.v. <span class="greek">σπυρίς</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4400960"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400960">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “join.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400961"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400961">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">πιστεύοντες</span> (<span class="translit">pisteuontes</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4400962"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400962">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “taking Saul, brought him.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιλαβόμενος</span> (<span class="translit">epilabomenos</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400963"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400963">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Saul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400964"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400964">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and brought,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4400965"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400965">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and that,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4400966"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400966">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this verb which is used 7 times in Acts, see BDAG 782 s.v. <span class="greek">παρρησιάζομαι</span> 1. See also v. 28.</p></p>
<p id="n4400967"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400967">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he was with them going in and going out in Jerusalem.” The expression “going in and going out” is probably best taken as an idiom for association without hindrance. Some modern translations (NASB, NIV) translate the phrase “moving about freely in Jerusalem,” although the NRSV retains the literal “he went in and out among them in Jerusalem.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400968"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400968">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “arguing.” BDAG 954 s.v. <span class="greek">συζητέω</span> 2 gives “<i>dispute, debate, argue</i>…<span class="greek">τινί</span> ‘w. someone’” for <span class="greek">συνεζήτει</span> (<span class="translit">sunezētei</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4400969"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400969">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the Hellenists,” but this descriptive term is largely unknown to the modern English reader. The translation “Greek-speaking Jews” attempts to convey something of who these were, but it was more than a matter of language spoken; it involved a degree of adoption of Greek culture as well.</p></p>
<p id="n4400970"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400970">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Caesarea</i> was a city on the coast of Palestine, south of Mount Carmel (not Caesarea Philippi). See the note on <i>Caesarea</i> in Acts 10:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4400971"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400971">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Therefore.” This verse is another summary text in Acts (cf. 2:41-47; 4:32-37; 5:12-16; 6:7).</p></p>
<p id="n4400972"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400972">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and Galilee,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4400973"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400973">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “had.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400974"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400974">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Built up.” The participle <span class="greek">οἰκοδομουμένη</span> (<span class="translit">oikodomoumenē</span>) has been translated as a participle of result related to <span class="greek">εἶχεν</span> (<span class="translit">eichen</span>). It could also be understood as adverbial to <span class="greek">ἐπληθύνετο</span> (<span class="translit">eplēthuneto</span>): “Then the church throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria experienced peace. Strengthened and living in the fear of the Lord and in the encouragement of the Holy Spirit, it increased in numbers.” Although some scholars do not regard the participle of result as a legitimate category, it is actually fairly common (see <i>ExSyn</i> 637-39).</p></p>
<p id="n4400975"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400975">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And living.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400976"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400976">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “it”; the referent (the church) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4400977"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400977">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4400978"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400978">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “As Peter was going through all [the places],” which is somewhat awkward in English. The meaning is best expressed by a phrase like “going around from place to place” or “traveling around from place to place.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400979"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400979">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lydda</i> was a city northwest of Jerusalem on the way to Joppa. It was about 10.5 miles (17 km) southeast of Joppa.</p></p>
<p id="n4400980"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400980">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> Since the participle <span class="greek">κατακείμενον</span> (<span class="translit">katakeimenon</span>), an adjectival participle modifying <span class="greek">Αἰνέαν</span> (<span class="translit">Ainean</span>), has been translated into English as a relative clause (“who had been confined to a mattress”), it would be awkward to follow with a second relative clause (<i>Grk</i> “who was paralyzed”). Furthermore, the relative pronoun here has virtually a causal force, giving the reason for confinement to the mattress, so it is best translated “because.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400981"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400981">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Peter.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400982"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400982">82</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several variants occur at this juncture. Some of the earliest and best witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B* C <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33<sup>vid</sup> Did<sup>pt</sup>) read “Jesus Christ” (<span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστός</span>, <span class="translit">Iēsous Christos</span>); others ([A] 36 1175 it) have “the Lord Jesus Christ” (<span class="greek">ὁ κύριος ᾿Ιησοῦς Χριστός</span>, <span class="translit">ho kurios Iēsous Christos</span>); a few read simply <span class="greek">ὁ Χριστός</span> (614 1241 1505); the majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (B<sup>2</sup> E 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span> Did<sup>pt</sup>) have “Jesus the Christ” ( <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς ὁ Χριστός</span>). Although the pedigree of this last reading is relatively weak, it draws strength from the fact that (a) the other readings are much more natural and thus more predictable, and (b) there are several variants for this text. It seems hardly likely that scribes would intentionally change a more common expression into a title that is used nowhere else in the NT (although 1 John 2:22; 5:1 come close with “Jesus is the Christ”), nor would they unintentionally change a frequently used designation into an unusual one. Thus, in spite of the external evidence (which is nevertheless sufficient to argue for authenticity), <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦς ὁ Χριστός</span> is the reading that best explains the rise of the others.</p><p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400983"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400983">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “make your own bed” for <span class="greek">στρῶσον σεαυτῷ</span> (<span class="translit">strōson seautō</span>) is given by BDAG 949 s.v. <span class="greek">στρωννύω</span> 1. Naturally this involves some adaptation, since a pallet or mat would not be ‘made up’ in the sense that a modern bed would be. The idea may be closer to “straighten” or “rearrange,” and the NIV’s “take care of your mat” attempts to reflect this, although this too probably conveys a slightly different idea to the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4400984"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400984">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And all.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4400985"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400985">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lydda</i> was a city northwest of Jerusalem on the way to Joppa.</p></p>
<p id="n4400986"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400986">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Sharon</i> refers to the plain of Sharon, a region along the coast of Palestine.</p></p>
<p id="n4400987"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400987">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> Repetition of the pronoun “they” as subject of <span class="greek">ἐπέστρεψαν</span> (<span class="translit">epestrepsan</span>) is not strictly necessary in English, but emphasizes slightly the resultative nature of the final clause: They turned to the Lord as a result of seeing Aeneas after he was healed.</p></p>
<p id="n4400988"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400988">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They turned</i>. To “turn” is a good summary term for the response to the gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n4400989"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400989">89</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Joppa</i> was a seaport on the Philistine coast, in the same location as modern Jaffa. “Though Joppa never became a major seaport, it was of some importance as a logistical base and an outlet to the Mediterranean” (A. F. Rainey, <i>ISBE</i> 2:1118-19).</p></p>
<p id="n4400990"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400990">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “which being translated is called.” In English this would normally be expressed “which is translated as” or “which in translation means.” The second option is given by L&amp;N 33.145.</p></p>
<p id="n4400991"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400991">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> This is a parenthetical note by the author. <i>Dorcas</i> is the Greek translation of the Aramaic name <i>Tabitha</i>. <i>Dorcas</i> in Greek means “gazelle” or “deer.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400992"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400992">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and helping the poor.” <i>Grk</i> “She was full of good deeds and acts of charity which she was continually doing.” Since it is somewhat redundant in English to say “she was full of good deeds…which she was continually doing,” the translation has been simplified to “she was continually doing good deeds and acts of charity.” The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐποίει</span> (<span class="translit">epoiei</span>) has been translated as a progressive imperfect (“was continually doing”).</p></p>
<p id="n4400993"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400993">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “It happened that in those days.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4400994"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400994">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “becoming sick, she died.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀσθενήσασαν</span> (<span class="translit">asthenēsasan</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4400995"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400995">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">λούσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">lousantes</span>) is taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4400996"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400996">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “washed her,” but the reference is to her corpse.</p></p>
<p id="n4400997"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400997">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lydda</i> was a city northwest of Jerusalem on the way to Joppa.</p></p>
<p id="n4400998"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400998">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Do not delay to come to us.” It is somewhat smoother to say in English, “Come to us without delay.”</p></p>
<p id="n4400999"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n4400999">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” The relative clause makes for awkward English style here, so the following clause was made coordinate with the conjunction “and” supplied in place of the Greek relative pronoun.</p></p>
<p id="n44009100"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">παραγενόμενον</span> (<span class="translit">paragenomenon</span>) is taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n44009101"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and all.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun.</p></p>
<p id="n44009102"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “him” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n44009103"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “shirts” (a long garment worn under the cloak next to the skin). The name for this garment (<span class="greek">χιτών</span>, <span class="translit">chitōn</span>) presents some difficulty in translation. Most modern readers would not understand what a ‘tunic’ was any more than they would be familiar with a ‘<i>chiton</i>.’ On the other hand attempts to find a modern equivalent are also a problem: “shirt” conveys the idea of a much shorter garment that covers only the upper body, and “undergarment” (given the styles of modern underwear) is more misleading still. “Tunic” was therefore employed, but with a note to explain its nature.</p></p>
<p id="n44009104"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and garments,” referring here to other types of clothing besides the tunics just mentioned.</p></p>
<p id="n44009105"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἐποίει</span> (<span class="translit">epoiei</span>) has been translated as a customary imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n44009106"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Peter, sending them all outside, knelt down.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐκβαλών</span> (<span class="translit">ekbalōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44009107"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and kneeling down,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more. Instead the “and” is placed before the verb <span class="greek">προσηύξατο</span> (<span class="translit">prosēuxato</span>, “and prayed”). The participle <span class="greek">θείς</span> (<span class="translit">theis</span>) is taken as a participle of attendant circumstance.</p></p>
<p id="n44009108"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and turning.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun.</p></p>
<p id="n44009109"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009109">109</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>She sat up</i>. This event is told much like Luke 8:49-56 and Mark 5:35-43. Peter’s ministry mirrored that of Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n44009110"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Giving her his hand, he raised her up.” The participle <span class="greek">δούς</span> (<span class="translit">dous</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44009111"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Then calling the saints…he presented her.” The participle <span class="greek">φωνήσας</span> (<span class="translit">phōnēsas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style; it could also be taken temporally (“After he called”).</p></p>
<p id="n44009112"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “known all over.” BDAG 511 s.v. <span class="greek">κατά</span> A.1.c. has “<i>became known throughout all Joppa</i>” for <span class="greek">γνωστὸν γενέσθαι καθ᾿ ὅλης ᾿Ιόππης</span> (<span class="translit">gnōston genesthai kath</span>’<span class="translit"> holēs Ioppēs</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n44009113"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009113">113</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>This became known…many believed in the Lord</i>. This is a “sign” miracle that pictures how the Lord can give life.</p></p>
<p id="n44009114"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So it happened that.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n44009115"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Peter) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44009116"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “with a certain Simon.”</p></p>
<p id="n44009117"><a href="file1071.xhtml#n44009117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “with a certain Simon Berseus.” Although most modern English translations treat <span class="greek">βυρσεῖ</span> (<span class="translit">bursei</span>) as Simon’s profession (“Simon the tanner”), it is possible that the word is actually Simon’s surname (“Simon Berseus” or “Simon Tanner”). BDAG 185 s.v. <span class="greek">βυρσεύς</span> regards it as a surname. See also MM 118.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
