<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Thessalonians 1</h2>
<p id="n530011"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n530011">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Paul.” The word “from” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to indicate the sender of the letter.</p></p>
<p id="n530013"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n530013">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Grace to you and peace.” </p></p>
<p id="n530014"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n530014">4</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Most witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A F G I 0278 1175 1241 1505 2464 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy sa) have <span class="greek">ἡμῶν</span> (<span class="translit">hēmōn</span>) after <span class="greek">πατρός</span> (<span class="translit">patros</span>), reading “God <i>our</i> Father,” in apparent emulation of Paul’s almost universal style. The omission of the pronoun (the reading of B D P 0111<sup>vid</sup> 33 1739 1881 SBL) seems to be the earlier wording of this salutation. As well, the intrinsic evidence also supports the shorter reading: If 2 Thessalonians is authentic, it was one of Paul’s earliest letters, and, if so, his stereotyped salutation was still in embryonic form (see discussion at 1 Thess 1:1). NA<sup>28</sup> places the word in brackets, indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n530015"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n530015">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers,” but the Greek word may be used for “brothers and sisters” or “fellow Christians” as here (cf. BDAG 18 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀδελφός</span> 1, where considerable nonbiblical evidence for the plural <span class="greek">ἀδελφοί</span> [<span class="translit">adelphoi</span>] meaning “brothers and sisters” is cited).</p></p>
<p id="n530016"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n530016">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as is worthy.”</p></p>
<p id="n530017"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n530017">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that you may be made worthy.” The passive infinitive <span class="greek">καταξιωθῆναι</span> (<span class="translit">kataxiōthēnai</span>) has been translated as an active construction in English for stylistic reasons.</p></p>
<p id="n530018"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n530018">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “if in fact/since,” as a continuation of the preceding.</p></p>
<p id="n530019"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n530019">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “at the revelation of the Lord Jesus.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300110"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n5300110">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “angels of power,” translated as an attributive genitive.</p></p>
<p id="n5300111"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n5300111">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “meting out,” as a description of Jesus Christ in v. 7. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started at the beginning of v. 8 in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5300112"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n5300112">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Jer 10:25, possibly also to Ps 79:6 and Isa 66:15.</p></p>
<p id="n5300113"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n5300113">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who,” describing the people mentioned in v. 8. A new sentence was started here in the translation by replacing the relative pronoun with a personal pronoun.</p></p>
<p id="n5300114"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n5300114">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “power,” or “might.” The construction can also be translated as an attributed genitive: “from his glorious strength” (cf. TEV “glorious might”; CEV “glorious strength”; NLT “glorious power”).</p><p><b>sn</b> An allusion to Isa 2:10, 19, 21.</p></p>
<p id="n5300115"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n5300115">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “marveled at.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300116"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n5300116">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “because our testimony to you was believed.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300117"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n5300117">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “your calling.”</p></p>
<p id="n5300118"><a href="file1170.xhtml#n5300118">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “by means of.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
