<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Acts 16</h2>
<p id="n440161"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n440161">1</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Derbe</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 35 mi (60 km) southeast of Lystra. It was about 90 mi (145 km) from Tarsus.</p></p>
<p id="n440162"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n440162">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lystra</i> was a city in Lycaonia about 18 mi (30 km) south of Iconium.</p></p>
<p id="n440163"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n440163">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold, a disciple.” Here <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n440164"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n440164">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 31.103 translates this phrase “the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer.”</p></p>
<p id="n440165"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n440165">5</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>His father was a Greek</i>. Timothy was the offspring of a mixed marriage between a Jewish woman (see 2 Tim 1:5) and a Gentile man. On mixed marriages in Judaism, see Neh 13:23-27; Ezra 9:1-10:44; Mal 2:10-16; <i>Jub</i>. 30:7-17; <i>m. Qiddushin</i> 3.12; <i>m. Yevamot</i> 7.5.</p></p>
<p id="n440166"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n440166">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> For this sense of <span class="greek">μαρτυρέω</span> (<span class="translit">martureō</span>), see BDAG 618 s.v. 2.b.</p></p>
<p id="n440167"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n440167">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who was well spoken of by the brothers in Lystra and Iconium.” Because of the awkwardness in English of having two relative clauses follow one another (“who was a believer…who was well spoken of”) and the awkwardness of the passive verb (“was well spoken of”), the relative pronoun at the beginning of 16:2 (“who”) has been translated as a pronoun (“him”) and the construction converted from passive to active at the same time a new sentence was started in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n440168"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n440168">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one”; the referent (Timothy) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n440169"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n440169">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and taking him he circumcised him.” The participle <span class="greek">λαβών</span> (<span class="translit">labōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. Paul’s cultural sensitivity showed in his action here. He did not want Timothy’s lack of circumcision to become an issue (1 Cor 9:15-23).</p></p>
<p id="n4401610"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401610">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">περιέτεμεν</span> (<span class="translit">perietemen</span>) here may be understood as causative (cf. <i>ExSyn</i> 411-12) if Paul did not personally perform the circumcision.</p></p>
<p id="n4401611"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401611">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who lived in the area.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401612"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401612">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The anarthrous predicate nominative has been translated as qualitative (“Greek”) rather than indefinite (“a Greek”).</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>His father was Greek</i>. Under Jewish law at least as early as the 2nd century, a person was considered Jewish if his or her mother was Jewish. It is not certain whether such a law was in effect in the 1st century, but even if it was, Timothy would not have been accepted as fully Jewish because he was not circumcised.</p></p>
<p id="n4401613"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401613">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “cities.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401614"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401614">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 762-63 s.v. <span class="greek">παραδίδωμι</span> 3 has “<i>they handed down to them the decisions to observe</i> Ac 16:4.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401616"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401616">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for them”; the referent (Gentile believers) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401617"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401617">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “observe” or “follow.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401618"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401618">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 437 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡμέρα</span> 2.c has “<i>every day</i>” for this phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n4401619"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401619">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Phrygia</i> was a district in central Asia Minor west of Pisidia.</p></p>
<p id="n4401620"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401620">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Galatia</i> refers to either (1) the region of the old kingdom of Galatia in the central part of Asia Minor (North Galatia), or (2) the Roman province of Galatia, whose principal cities in the 1st century were Ancyra and Pisidian Antioch (South Galatia). The exact extent and meaning of this area has been a subject of considerable controversy in modern NT studies.</p></p>
<p id="n4401621"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401621">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “forbidden.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401622"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401622">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “word.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401623"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401623">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Asia”; in the NT this always refers to the Roman province of Asia. The Roman province of Asia made up about one-third of modern Asia Minor and was on the western side of it. Asia lay to the west of the region of Phrygia and Galatia. The words “the province of” are supplied to indicate to the modern reader that this does not refer to the continent of Asia.</p></p>
<p id="n4401624"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401624">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 511 s.v. <span class="greek">κατά</span> B.1.b has “<i>to Mysia</i>” here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401625"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401625">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Mysia</i> was a province in northwest Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4401626"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401626">26</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Bithynia</i> was a province in northern Asia Minor northeast of Mysia.</p></p>
<p id="n4401627"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401627">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “permit”; see BDAG 269 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐάω</span> 1.</p></p>
<p id="n4401628"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401628">28</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “do this” are not in the Greek text, but are supplied for stylistic reasons, since English handles ellipses differently than Greek.</p></p>
<p id="n4401629"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401629">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although the normal meaning for <span class="greek">παρέρχομαι</span> (<span class="translit">parerchomai</span>) is “pass by, go by,” it would be difficult to get to Troas from where Paul and his companions were without going through rather than around Mysia. BDAG 776 s.v. <span class="greek">παρέρχομαι</span> 6 list some nonbiblical examples of the meaning “go through, pass through,” and give that meaning for the usage here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401630"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401630">30</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Mysia</i> was a province in northwest Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4401631"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401631">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Troas</i> was a port city (and surrounding region) on the northwest coast of Asia Minor, near ancient Troy.</p></p>
<p id="n4401632"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401632">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And a.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401633"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401633">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “there” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4401634"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401634">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4401635"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401635">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Coming over.” The participle <span class="greek">διαβάς</span> (<span class="translit">diabas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401636"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401636">36</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Macedonia</i> was the Roman province of Macedonia in Greece.</p></p>
<p id="n4401637"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401637">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Paul) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401638"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401638">38</a> <p><b>sn</b> This marks the beginning of one of the “<i>we</i>” sections in Acts (16:10-17; 20:5-15; 21:1-18; 27:1-28:16). These have been traditionally understood to mean that the author was in the company of Paul for this part of the journey.</p></p>
<p id="n4401639"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401639">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sought.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401640"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401640">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Macedonia</i> was the Roman province of Macedonia in Greece.</p></p>
<p id="n4401641"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401641">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “summoned.” </p></p>
<p id="n4401642"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401642">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 62 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀνάγω</span> 4, “as a nautical t.t. (<span class="greek">ἀ</span>.<span class="greek"> τὴν ναῦν</span> put a ship to sea), mid. or pass. <span class="greek">ἀνάγεσθαι</span> to begin to go by boat, <i>put out to sea</i>.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401643"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401643">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Troas</i> was a port city (and surrounding region) on the northwest coast of Asia Minor. See v. 8.</p></p>
<p id="n4401644"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401644">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 406 s.v. <span class="greek">εὐθυδρομέω</span> has “of a ship <i>run a straight course</i>” here; L&amp;N 54.3 has “to sail a straight course, sail straight to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401645"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401645">45</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Samothrace</i> is an island in the northern part of the Aegean Sea.</p></p>
<p id="n4401646"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401646">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Neapolis</i> was a seaport on the southern coast of Macedonia. It was 10 mi (16 km) from Philippi.</p></p>
<p id="n4401648"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401648">48</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Or perhaps, “a city in the first district” (there are a number of textual variants). L&amp;N 1.85 follow the text of UBS<sup>5</sup> and NA<sup>28</sup> here: “In Ac 16:12…the Greek New Testament published by the United Bible Societies has adopted a conjectural emendation, since the more traditional text, <span class="greek">πρώτη τῆς μερίδος</span>, literally ‘first of the district,’ is not only misleading in meaning but does not reflect the historical fact that Philippi was a city in one of the four districts of Macedonia but was not a capital city.” The <i>Ausgangstext</i> probably read <span class="greek">πρώτη τῆς μερίδος</span> (<span class="translit">prōtē tēs meridos</span>, “first of that district”) as found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A C <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33<sup>vid</sup> 36 81 323 945 1175 1891. This has traditionally been translated to give the impression that Philippi was the capital city of the district, but it does not necessarily have to be translated this way. The translation of the article before <span class="greek">μερίδος</span> as “that” acknowledges that there were other districts in the province of Macedonia.</p></p>
<p id="n4401649"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401649">49</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Macedonia</i> was the Roman province of Macedonia in Greece.</p></p>
<p id="n4401650"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401650">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> A <i>Roman colony</i> was a city whose residents were regarded as Roman citizens, since such cities were originally colonized by citizens of Rome. From Troas to Philippi was 130 mi (208 km).</p></p>
<p id="n4401651"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401651">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and sitting down we began to speak.” The participle <span class="greek">καθίσαντες</span> (<span class="translit">kathisantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401652"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401652">52</a> <p><b>tn</b> The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἐλαλοῦμεν</span> (<span class="translit">elaloumen</span>) has been translated as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4401653"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401653">53</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>To the women</i>. Apparently there were not enough Jews present in Philippi to have a synagogue (ten men would have been required to have one).</p></p>
<p id="n4401654"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401654">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “there” is not in the Greek text, but is implied.</p></p>
<p id="n4401655"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401655">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And a.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401656"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401656">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term translated “a dealer in purple cloth” see BDAG 855 s.v. <span class="greek">πορφυρόπωλις</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4401657"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401657">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Thyatira</i> was a city in western Asia Minor.</p></p>
<p id="n4401658"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401658">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “to us” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects in Greek were often omitted when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4401659"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401659">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although BDAG 880 s.v. <span class="greek">προσέχω</span> 2.b gives the meaning “<i>pay attention to</i>” here, this could be misunderstood by the modern English reader to mean merely listening intently. The following context, however, indicates that Lydia responded positively to Paul’s message, so the verb here was translated “to respond.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Lydia</i> is one of several significant women in Acts (see 17:4, 12, 34; 18:20).</p></p>
<p id="n4401660"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401660">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “urged us, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγουσα</span> (<span class="translit">legousa</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4401661"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401661">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a first class condition in Greek, with the statement presented as real or true for the sake of the argument.</p></p>
<p id="n4401662"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401662">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “faithful to the Lord.” BDAG 821 s.v. <span class="greek">πίστος</span> 2 states concerning this verse, “Of one who confesses the Christian faith <i>believing</i> or <i>a believer in the Lord, in Christ, in God</i> <span class="greek">πιστ</span>.<span class="greek"> τῷ κυρίῳ</span> Ac 16:15.” L&amp;N 11.17 has “one who is included among the faithful followers of Christ—‘believer, Christian, follower.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4401663"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401663">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Although BDAG 759 s.v. <span class="greek">παραβιάζομαι</span> has “<i>urge strongly, prevail upon</i>,” in contemporary English “persuade” is a more frequently used synonym for “prevail upon.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401664"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401664">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4401665"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401665">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “who had a spirit of divination”; <i>Grk</i> “who had a spirit of Python.” According to BDAG 896-97 s.v. <span class="greek">πύθων</span>, originally <span class="greek">Πύθων</span> (<span class="translit">Puthōn</span>) was the name of the serpent or dragon that guarded the Delphic oracle. According to Greek mythology, it lived at the foot of Mount Parnassus and was killed by Apollo. From this, the word came to designate a person who was thought to have a spirit of divination. Pagan generals, for example, might consult someone like this. So her presence here suggests a supernatural encounter involving Paul and her “spirit.” W. Foerster, <i>TDNT</i> 6:920, connects the term with ventriloquism but states: “We must assume, however, that for this girl, as for those mentioned by Origen…, the art of ventriloquism was inseparably connected with a (supposed or authentic) gift of soothsaying.” It should also be noted that if the girl in question here were only a ventriloquist, the exorcism performed by Paul in v. 18 would not have been effective.</p></p>
<p id="n4401666"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401666">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who.” Because of the awkwardness in English of having two relative clauses follow one another (“who had a spirit…who brought her owners a great profit”) the relative pronoun here (“who”) has been translated as a pronoun (“she”) and a new sentence begun in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4401667"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401667">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “masters.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401668"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401668">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term see BDAG 616 s.v. <span class="greek">μαντεύομαι</span>. It was used of those who gave oracles.</p></p>
<p id="n4401669"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401669">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “crying out, saying”; the participle <span class="greek">λέγουσα</span> (<span class="translit">legousa</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated. The imperfect verb <span class="greek">ἔκραζεν</span> (<span class="translit">ekrazen</span>) has been translated as a progressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4401670"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401670">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “slaves.” See the note on the word “servants” in 2:18. The translation “servants” was used here because in this context there appears to be more emphasis on the activity of Paul and his companions (“proclaiming to you the way of salvation”) than on their status as “slaves of the Most High God.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401671"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401671">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a way.” The grammar of this phrase is a bit ambiguous. The phrase in Greek is <span class="greek">ὁδὸν σωτηρίας</span> (<span class="translit">hodon sōtērias</span>). Neither the head noun nor the genitive noun has the article; this is in keeping with Apollonius’ Canon (see <i>ExSyn</i> 239-40). Since both nouns are anarthrous, this construction also fits Apollonius’ Corollary (see <i>ExSyn</i> 250-54); since the genitive noun is abstract it is most naturally qualitative, so the head noun could either be definite or indefinite without being unusual as far as the grammar is concerned. Luke’s usage of <span class="greek">ὁδός</span> elsewhere is indecisive as far as this passage is concerned. However, when one looks at the historical background it is clear that (1) the woman is shut up (via exorcism) not because her testimony is false but because of its source (analogous to Jesus’ treatment of demons perhaps), and (b) “the way” is a par excellence description of the new faith throughout Acts. It thus seems that at least in Luke’s presentation “the way of salvation” is the preferred translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4401672"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401672">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Proclaiming to you the way of salvation</i>. The remarks were an ironic recognition of Paul’s authority, but he did not desire such a witness, possibly for fear of confusion. Her expression <i>the Most High God</i> might have been understood as Zeus by the audience.</p></p>
<p id="n4401673"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401673">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “becoming greatly annoyed.” The participle <span class="greek">διαπονηθείς</span> (<span class="translit">diaponētheis</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. The aorist has been translated as an ingressive aorist (entry into a state or condition). See BDAG 235 s.v. <span class="greek">διαπονέομαι</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4401674"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401674">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and turning.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιστρέψας</span> (<span class="translit">epistrepsas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401675"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401675">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401676"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401676">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 1102-3 s.v. <span class="greek">ὥρα</span> 2.c has “<i>at that very time, at once, instantly</i>” for the usage in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401677"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401677">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “masters.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401678"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401678">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this use of <span class="greek">ἐργασία</span> (<span class="translit">ergasia</span>), see BDAG 390 s.v. 4. It is often the case that destructive practices and commerce are closely tied together.</p></p>
<p id="n4401679"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401679">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “was gone, seizing.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιλαβόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">epilabomenoi</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401680"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401680">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">ἕλκω</span> (<span class="translit">helkō</span>) see BDAG 318 s.v. 1.</p></p>
<p id="n4401681"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401681">81</a> <p><b>sn</b> The marketplace (Greek <i>agora</i>) was not only a place of trade and commerce in the first century Greco-Roman world. It was a place of discussion and dialogue (the “public square”), a place of judgment (courts held session there), a place for idle people and those seeking work, and a place for children to play.</p></p>
<p id="n4401682"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401682">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n4401683"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401683">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “having brought them.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιλαβόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">epilabomenoi</span>) has been taken temporally. It is also possible in English to translate this participle as a finite verb: “they brought them before the magistrates and said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401684"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401684">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> BDAG 309 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐκταράσσω</span> has “<i>agitate, cause trouble to, throw into confusion</i>” for the meaning of this verb.</p></p>
<p id="n4401685"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401685">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “being Jews, and they are proclaiming.” The participle <span class="greek">ὑπάρχοντες</span> (<span class="translit">huparchontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401686"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401686">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “proclaiming,” but in relation to customs, “advocating” is a closer approximation to the meaning.</p></p>
<p id="n4401687"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401687">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “acknowledge.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401688"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401688">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Customs that are not lawful for us to accept or practice</i>. Ironically, the charges are similar to those made against Jesus in Luke 23:2, where Jews argued he was “twisting” their customs. The charge has three elements: (1) a racial element (Jewish); (2) a social element (unlawful); and (3) a traditional element (not their customs).</p></p>
<p id="n4401689"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401689">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “we being Romans.” The participle <span class="greek">οὖσιν</span> (<span class="translit">ousin</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4401690"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401690">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 39.50 has “the crowd joined the attack against them” for <span class="greek">συνεπέστη</span> (<span class="translit">sunepestē</span>) in this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n4401691"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401691">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “tearing the clothes off them, the magistrates ordered.” The participle <span class="greek">περιρήξαντες</span> (<span class="translit">perirēxantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. Although it may be possible to understand the aorist active participle <span class="greek">περιρήξαντες</span> in a causative sense (“the magistrates caused the clothes to be torn off Paul and Silas”) in the mob scene that was taking place, it is also possible that the magistrates themselves actively participated. This act was done to prepare them for a public flogging (2 Cor 11:25; 1 Thess 2:2).</p></p>
<p id="n4401692"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401692">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “off them”; the referents (Paul and Silas) have been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4401693"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401693">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> The infinitive <span class="greek">ῥαβδίζειν</span> (<span class="translit">rhabdizein</span>) means “to beat with rods or sticks” (as opposed to fists, BDAG 902 s.v. <span class="greek">ῥαβδίζω</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4401694"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401694">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Having inflicted many blows on them.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐπιθέντες</span> (<span class="translit">epithentes</span>) has been taken temporally. BDAG 384 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιτίθημι</span> 1.a.<span class="greek">β</span> has “<i>inflict blows upon someone</i>” for this expression, but in this context it is simpler to translate in English as “they had beaten them severely.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401695"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401695">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “commanding.” The participle <span class="greek">παραγγείλαντες</span> (<span class="translit">parangeilantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401696"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401696">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “prison.”</p></p>
<p id="n4401697"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401697">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 6.21 has “stocks” for <span class="greek">εἰς τὸ ξύλον</span> (<span class="translit">eis to xulon</span>) here, as does BDAG 685 s.v. <span class="greek">ξύλον</span> 2.b. However, it is also possible (as mentioned in L&amp;N 18.12) that this does not mean “stocks” but a block of wood (a log or wooden column) in the prison to which prisoners’ feet were chained or tied. Such a possibility is suggested by v. 26, where the “bonds” (“chains”?) of the prisoners loosened.</p></p>
<p id="n4401698"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401698">98</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “praying, were singing.” The participle <span class="greek">προσευχόμενοι</span> (<span class="translit">proseuchomenoi</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4401699"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n4401699">99</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Praying and singing hymns to God</i>. Tertullian said, “The legs feel nothing in the stocks when the heart is in heaven” (<i>To the Martyrs</i> 2; cf. Rom 5:3; Jas 1:2; 1 Pet 5:6). The presence of God means the potential to be free (cf. v. 26).</p></p>
<p id="n44016100"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the rest of” are not in the Greek text, but are implied.</p></p>
<p id="n44016101"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “chains.” The translation of <span class="greek">τὰ δεσμά</span> (<span class="translit">ta desma</span>) is to some extent affected by the understanding of <span class="greek">ξύλον</span> (<span class="translit">xulon</span>, “stocks”) in v. 24. It is possible (as mentioned in L&amp;N 18.12) that this does not mean “stocks” but a block of wood (a log or wooden column) in the prison to which prisoners’ feet were chained or tied.</p></p>
<p id="n44016102"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 23.75 has “had awakened” here. It is more in keeping with contemporary English style, however, to keep the two verbal ideas parallel in terms of tense (“when the jailer woke up and saw”) although logically the second action is subsequent to the first.</p></p>
<p id="n44016103"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> The additional semantic component “standing” is supplied (“standing open”) to convey a stative nuance in English.</p></p>
<p id="n44016104"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016104">104</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Was about to kill himself</i>. The jailer’s penalty for failing to guard the prisoners would have been death, so he contemplated saving the leaders the trouble (see Acts 12:19; 27:42).</p></p>
<p id="n44016105"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016105">105</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “thought.”</p></p>
<p id="n44016106"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But Paul called out with a loud voice, saying.” The dative phrase <span class="greek">μεγάλῃ φωνῇ</span> (<span class="translit">megalē phōnē</span>) has been simplified as an English adverb (“loudly”), and the participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) has not been translated since it is redundant in English.</p></p>
<p id="n44016107"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Do not harm yourself</i>. Again the irony is that Paul is the agent through whom the jailer is spared.</p></p>
<p id="n44016108"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016108">108</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (the jailer) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44016109"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and prostrated himself.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Fell down</i>. The earthquake and the freeing of the prisoners showed that God’s power was present. Such power could only be recognized. The open doors opened the jailer’s heart.</p></p>
<p id="n44016110"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And bringing them outside, he asked.” The participle <span class="greek">προαγαγών</span> (<span class="translit">proagagōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style. Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun by supplying the conjunction “then” to indicate the logical sequence.</p></p>
<p id="n44016111"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term (<span class="greek">δεῖ</span>, <span class="translit">dei</span>) is used by Luke to represent divine necessity.</p></p>
<p id="n44016112"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016112">112</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “said.”</p></p>
<p id="n44016113"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016113">113</a> <p><b>sn</b> Here the summary term of response is a call to <i>believe</i>. In this context it refers to trusting the sovereign God’s power to deliver, which events had just pictured for the jailer.</p></p>
<p id="n44016114"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016114">114</a> <p><b>tc</b> The majority of <span class="smcaps">mss</span> add <span class="greek">Χριστόν</span> (<span class="translit">Christon</span>, “Christ”) here (C D E <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 1739 <span class="apparatus">M</span> sy sa), but the best and earliest witnesses read simply <span class="greek">τὸν κύριον ᾿Ιησοῦν</span> (<span class="translit">ton kurion Iēsoun</span>, “the Lord Jesus”; <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B 33 81 bo). The addition of “Christ” to “Lord Jesus” is an obviously motivated reading. Thus on both external and internal grounds, the shorter reading is strongly preferred.</p></p>
<p id="n44016115"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016115">115</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And they.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the continuity with the preceding verse. Greek style often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” but English style does not.</p></p>
<p id="n44016116"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016116">116</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The word of the Lord</i> is a technical expression in OT literature, often referring to a divine prophetic utterance (e.g., Gen 15:1, Isa 1:10, Jonah 1:1). In the NT it occurs 15 times: 3 times as <span class="greek">ῥῆμα τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">rhēma tou kuriou</span>; Luke 22:61, Acts 11:16, 1 Pet 1:25) and 12 times as <span class="greek">λόγος τοῦ κυρίου</span> (<span class="translit">logos tou kuriou</span>; here and in Acts 8:25; 13:44, 48, 49; 15:35, 36; 19:10, 20; 1 Thess 1:8; 4:15; 2 Thess 3:1). As in the OT, this phrase focuses on the prophetic nature and divine origin of what has been said.</p></p>
<p id="n44016117"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And at.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here.</p></p>
<p id="n44016118"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “taking them…he washed.” The participle <span class="greek">παραλαβών</span> (<span class="translit">paralabōn</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44016119"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016119">119</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this phrase BDAG 603 s.v. <span class="greek">λούω</span> 1 gives a literal translation as “by washing he freed them from the effects of the blows.”</p></p>
<p id="n44016120"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the logical sequence.</p></p>
<p id="n44016121"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016121">121</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>All his family</i>. It was often the case in the ancient world that conversion of the father led to the conversion of all those in the household.</p></p>
<p id="n44016122"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016122">122</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “immediately.”</p></p>
<p id="n44016123"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “He”; the referent (the jailer) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44016124"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016124">124</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “placed [food] on the table” (a figurative expression). Since the actual word for food is not specified, it would also be possible to translate “set a meal before them,” but since this is taking place in the middle of the night, the preparations necessary for a full meal would probably not have been made. More likely Paul and Silas were given whatever was on hand that needed little or no preparation.</p></p>
<p id="n44016125"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016125">125</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “he was overjoyed.”</p></p>
<p id="n44016126"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016126">126</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “come to believe” reflects more of the resultative nuance of the perfect tense here.</p></p>
<p id="n44016127"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> The phrase “together with his entire household” is placed at the end of the English sentence so that it refers to both the rejoicing and the belief. A formal equivalence translation would have “and he rejoiced greatly with his entire household that he had come to believe in God,” but the reference to the entire household being baptized in v. 33 presumes that all in the household believed.</p></p>
<p id="n44016128"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016128">128</a> <p><b>tn</b> The translation “<i>day is breaking</i>” for <span class="greek">ἡμέρα γίνεται</span> (<span class="translit">hēmera ginetai</span>) in this verse is given by BDAG 436 s.v. <span class="greek">ἡμέρα</span> 1.a.</p></p>
<p id="n44016129"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016129">129</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term translated “magistrates,” see BDAG 947-48 s.v. <span class="greek">στρατηγός</span> 1. These city leaders were properly called <i>duoviri</i>, but were popularly known as <i>praetors</i> (<span class="greek">στρατηγοί</span>, <span class="translit">stratēgoi</span>). They were the chief officials of Philippi. The text leaves the impression that they came to the decision to release Paul and Silas independently. God was at work everywhere.</p></p>
<p id="n44016130"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">ῥαβδοῦχος</span> (<span class="translit">rhabdouchos</span>) see BDAG 902 s.v. The term was used of the Roman <i>lictor</i> and roughly corresponds to contemporary English “constable, policeman.”</p></p>
<p id="n44016131"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016131">131</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “saying” is not in the Greek text, but is implied; it is necessary in English because the content of what the jailer said to Paul and Silas is not the exact message related to him by the police officers, but is a summary with his own additions.</p></p>
<p id="n44016132"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “orders” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects in Greek were often omitted when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n44016133"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “So coming out now go in peace.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐξελθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">exelthontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44016134"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to them”; the referent (the police officers) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44016135"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016135">135</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Having us beaten in public.” The participle <span class="greek">δείραντες</span> (<span class="translit">deirantes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44016136"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “in public, uncondemned.” BDAG 35 s.v. <span class="greek">ἀκατάκριτος</span> has “<i>uncondemned, without due process</i>” for this usage.</p></p>
<p id="n44016137"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016137">137</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">ὑπάρχοντας</span> (<span class="translit">huparchontas</span>) has been translated as a concessive adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n44016138"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “us” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were often omitted in Greek when clear from the context, but must be supplied for the modern English reader.</p></p>
<p id="n44016139"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016139">139</a> <p><b>tn</b> L&amp;N 28.71 has “send us away secretly” for this verse.</p></p>
<p id="n44016140"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But they.” </p></p>
<p id="n44016141"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016141">141</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>They themselves must come and escort us out!</i> Paul was asking for the injustice he and Silas suffered to be symbolically righted. It was a way of publicly taking their actions off the record and showing the apostles’ innocence, a major public statement. Note the apology given in v. 39.</p></p>
<p id="n44016142"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016142">142</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “heard they”; the referents (Paul and Silas) have been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n44016143"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016143">143</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Roman citizens</i>. This fact was disturbing to the officials because due process was a right for a Roman citizen, well established in Roman law. To flog a Roman citizen was considered an abomination. Such punishment was reserved for noncitizens.</p></p>
<p id="n44016144"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016144">144</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and coming, they apologized.” The participle <span class="greek">ἐλθόντες</span> (<span class="translit">elthontes</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n44016145"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016145">145</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and after.” Because of the length of the Greek sentence, the conjunction <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated here. Instead a new English sentence is begun.</p></p>
<p id="n44016146"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016146">146</a> <p><b>tn</b> The verb <span class="greek">ἐρώτων</span> (<span class="translit">erōtōn</span>) has been translated as an iterative imperfect; the English adverb “repeatedly” brings out the iterative force in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n44016147"><a href="file1078.xhtml#n44016147">147</a> <p><b>tn</b> “Then” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied to clarify the logical sequence in the translation.</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
