<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Hebrews 8</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hebrews<br />Chapter 8</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">The High Priest of a Better Covenant</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:1</span> Now the main point of what we are saying is this:<sup><a id="n580081" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n580081">1</a></sup> We have such a high priest, one who <i>sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven</i>,<sup><a id="n580082" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n580082">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">8:2</span> a minister in the sanctuary and the true tabernacle that the Lord, not man, set up. <span class="verse">8:3</span> For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices. So this one too had to have something to offer. <span class="verse">8:4</span> Now if he were on earth, he would not be a priest, since there are already priests who offer<sup><a id="n580083" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n580083">3</a></sup> the gifts prescribed by the law. <span class="verse">8:5</span> The place where they serve is<sup><a id="n580084" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n580084">4</a></sup> a sketch<sup><a id="n580085" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n580085">5</a></sup> and shadow of the heavenly sanctuary, just as Moses was warned by God as he was about to complete the tabernacle. For he says, “<b><i>See that you make everything according to the design</i></b><sup><a id="n580086" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n580086">6</a></sup> <b><i>shown</i> <i>to you on the mountain</i></b>.”<sup><a id="n580087" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n580087">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">8:6</span> But<sup><a id="n580088" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n580088">8</a></sup> now Jesus<sup><a id="n580089" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n580089">9</a></sup> has obtained a superior ministry, since<sup><a id="n5800810" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800810">10</a></sup> the covenant that he mediates is also better and is enacted<sup><a id="n5800811" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800811">11</a></sup> on better promises.<sup><a id="n5800812" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800812">12</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:7</span> For if that first covenant had been faultless, no one would have looked for a second one.<sup><a id="n5800813" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800813">13</a></sup> <span class="verse">8:8</span> But<sup><a id="n5800814" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800814">14</a></sup> showing its fault,<sup><a id="n5800815" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800815">15</a></sup> God<sup><a id="n5800816" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800816">16</a></sup> says to them,<sup><a id="n5800817" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800817">17</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry">“<i><b>Look, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will complete a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah</b></i>.</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">8:9</span> “<b><i>It will not be like the covenant</i></b><sup><a id="n5800818" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800818">18</a></sup> <i><b>that I made with their fathers, on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt, because they did not continue in my covenant and I had no regard for them, says the Lord</b></i>.</p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">8:10</span> “<i><b>For this is the covenant that I will establish with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord</b>. <b>I will put</b></i><sup><a id="n5800819" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800819">19</a></sup> <b><i>my</i> <i>laws in their minds</i></b><sup><a id="n5800820" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800820">20</a></sup> <i><b>and I will inscribe them on their hearts</b>. <b>And I will be their God and they will be my people</b></i>.<sup><a id="n5800821" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800821">21</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">8:11</span> “<b><i>And there will be no need at all</i></b><sup><a id="n5800822" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800822">22</a></sup> <i><b>for each one to teach his countryman or each one to teach his brother saying</b></i>, ‘<i><b>Know the Lord</b>,</i>’ <i><b>since they will all know me, from the least to the greatest</b></i>.<sup><a id="n5800823" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800823">23</a></sup> </p>
<p class="otpoetry"><span class="verse">8:12</span> “<i><b>For I will be merciful toward their evil deeds, and their sins I will remember no longer</b></i>.”<sup><a id="n5800824" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800824">24</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">8:13</span> When he speaks of a new covenant,<sup><a id="n5800825" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800825">25</a></sup> he makes the first obsolete. Now what is growing obsolete and aging is about to disappear.<sup><a id="n5800826" href="file1199_notes.xhtml#n5800826">26</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>