<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 2 Timothy 4</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>2 Timothy<br />Chapter 4</h1>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Charge to Timothy Repeated</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:1</span> I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who is going to judge the living and the dead, and by his appearing and his kingdom: <span class="verse">4:2</span> Preach the message,<sup><a id="n550041" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n550041">1</a></sup> be ready<sup><a id="n550042" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n550042">2</a></sup> whether it is convenient or not,<sup><a id="n550043" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n550043">3</a></sup> reprove, rebuke, exhort<sup><a id="n550044" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n550044">4</a></sup> with complete patience and instruction. <span class="verse">4:3</span> For there will be a time when people<sup><a id="n550045" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n550045">5</a></sup> will not tolerate sound teaching. Instead, following their own desires,<sup><a id="n550046" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n550046">6</a></sup> they will accumulate teachers for themselves, because they have an insatiable curiosity to hear new things.<sup><a id="n550047" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n550047">7</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:4</span> And they will turn away from hearing the truth, but on the other hand they will turn aside to myths.<sup><a id="n550048" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n550048">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:5</span> You, however, be self-controlled<sup><a id="n550049" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n550049">9</a></sup> in all things, endure hardship, do an evangelist’s work, fulfill your ministry. <span class="verse">4:6</span> For I am already being poured out as an offering, and the time for me to depart<sup><a id="n5500410" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500410">10</a></sup> is at hand. <span class="verse">4:7</span> I have competed well;<sup><a id="n5500411" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500411">11</a></sup> I have finished the race; I have kept the faith! <span class="verse">4:8</span> Finally the crown of righteousness is reserved for me. The Lord, the righteous Judge, will award it to me in that day—and not to me only, but also to all who have set their affection on<sup><a id="n5500412" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500412">12</a></sup> his appearing. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Travel Plans and Concluding Greetings</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:9</span> Make every effort to come to me soon. <span class="verse">4:10</span> For Demas<sup><a id="n5500413" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500413">13</a></sup> deserted me, since he loved<sup><a id="n5500414" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500414">14</a></sup> the present age, and he went to Thessalonica. Crescens went to Galatia and Titus to Dalmatia. <span class="verse">4:11</span> Only Luke is with me. Get Mark and bring him with you, because he is a great help<sup><a id="n5500416" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500416">16</a></sup> to me in ministry.<sup><a id="n5500417" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500417">17</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:12</span> Now I have sent Tychicus to Ephesus. <span class="verse">4:13</span> When you come, bring with you the cloak I left in Troas with Carpas and the scrolls, especially the parchments. <span class="verse">4:14</span> Alexander the coppersmith did me a great deal of harm.<sup><a id="n5500419" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500419">19</a></sup> <i>The Lord will repay him in keeping with his deeds</i>.<sup><a id="n5500420" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500420">20</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:15</span> You be on guard against him<sup><a id="n5500421" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500421">21</a></sup> too, because he vehemently opposed our words. <span class="verse">4:16</span> At my first defense no one appeared in my support; instead they all deserted me—may they not be held accountable for it. <span class="verse">4:17</span> But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, so that through me the message<sup><a id="n5500422" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500422">22</a></sup> would be fully proclaimed<sup><a id="n5500423" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500423">23</a></sup> for all the Gentiles to hear. And so I was delivered from the lion’s mouth! <span class="verse">4:18</span> The Lord will deliver me from every evil deed and will bring me safely<sup><a id="n5500424" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500424">24</a></sup> into his heavenly kingdom. To him<sup><a id="n5500425" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500425">25</a></sup> be glory for ever and ever!<sup><a id="n5500426" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500426">26</a></sup> Amen. </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">4:19</span> Greetings to<sup><a id="n5500427" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500427">27</a></sup> Prisca and Aquila<sup><a id="n5500428" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500428">28</a></sup> and the family of Onesiphorus. <span class="verse">4:20</span> Erastus stayed in Corinth. Trophimus I left ill in Miletus. <span class="verse">4:21</span> Make every effort to come before winter. Greetings to you from Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the brothers and sisters.<sup><a id="n5500430" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500430">30</a></sup> <span class="verse">4:22</span> The Lord<sup><a id="n5500431" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500431">31</a></sup> be with your spirit. Grace be with you.<sup><a id="n5500432" href="file1184_notes.xhtml#n5500432">32</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>