<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1 Colossians 2</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Colossians<br />Chapter 2</h1>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:1</span> For I want you to know how great a struggle I have for you,<sup><a id="n510021" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n510021">1</a></sup> and for those in Laodicea, and for those who have not met me face to face.<sup><a id="n510022" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n510022">2</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:2</span> My goal is that<sup><a id="n510023" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n510023">3</a></sup> their hearts, having been knit together<sup><a id="n510024" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n510024">4</a></sup> in love, may be encouraged, and that<sup><a id="n510025" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n510025">5</a></sup> they may have all the riches that assurance brings in their understanding of the knowledge of the mystery of God, namely, Christ,<sup><a id="n510026" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n510026">6</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:3</span> in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. <span class="verse">2:4</span> I say this so that no one will deceive you through arguments<sup><a id="n510027" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n510027">7</a></sup> that sound reasonable.<sup><a id="n510028" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n510028">8</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:5</span> For though<sup><a id="n510029" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n510029">9</a></sup> I am absent from you in body, I am present with you in spirit, rejoicing to see<sup><a id="n5100210" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100210">10</a></sup> your morale<sup><a id="n5100211" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100211">11</a></sup> and the firmness of your faith in Christ. </p>
<p class="paragraphtitle">Warnings Against the Adoption of False Philosophies</p><p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:6</span> Therefore, just as you received Christ Jesus as Lord,<sup><a id="n5100212" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100212">12</a></sup> continue to live your lives<sup><a id="n5100213" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100213">13</a></sup> in him, <span class="verse">2:7</span> rooted<sup><a id="n5100214" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100214">14</a></sup> and built up in him and firm<sup><a id="n5100215" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100215">15</a></sup> in your<sup><a id="n5100216" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100216">16</a></sup> faith just as you were taught, and overflowing with thankfulness. <span class="verse">2:8</span> Be careful not to allow anyone to captivate you<sup><a id="n5100217" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100217">17</a></sup> through an empty, deceitful philosophy<sup><a id="n5100218" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100218">18</a></sup> that is according to human traditions and the elemental spirits<sup><a id="n5100219" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100219">19</a></sup> of the world, and not according to Christ. <span class="verse">2:9</span> For in him all the fullness of deity lives<sup><a id="n5100220" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100220">20</a></sup> in bodily form, <span class="verse">2:10</span> and you have been filled in him, who is the head over every ruler and authority. <span class="verse">2:11</span> In him you also were circumcised—not, however,<sup><a id="n5100221" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100221">21</a></sup> with a circumcision performed by human hands, but by the removal<sup><a id="n5100222" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100222">22</a></sup> of the fleshly body,<sup><a id="n5100223" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100223">23</a></sup> that is,<sup><a id="n5100224" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100224">24</a></sup> through the circumcision done by Christ. <span class="verse">2:12</span> Having been buried with him in baptism, you also have been raised with him through your<sup><a id="n5100225" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100225">25</a></sup> faith in the power<sup><a id="n5100226" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100226">26</a></sup> of God who raised him from the dead. <span class="verse">2:13</span> And even though you were dead in your<sup><a id="n5100227" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100227">27</a></sup> transgressions and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, he nevertheless<sup><a id="n5100228" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100228">28</a></sup> made you alive with him, having forgiven all your transgressions. <span class="verse">2:14</span> He has destroyed<sup><a id="n5100229" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100229">29</a></sup> what was against us, a certificate of indebtedness<sup><a id="n5100230" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100230">30</a></sup> expressed in decrees opposed to us. He has taken it away by nailing it to the cross. <span class="verse">2:15</span> Disarming<sup><a id="n5100231" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100231">31</a></sup> the rulers and authorities, he has made a public disgrace of them, triumphing over them by the cross.<sup><a id="n5100232" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100232">32</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:16</span> Therefore do not let anyone judge you with respect to food or drink, or in the matter of a feast, new moon, or Sabbath days— <span class="verse">2:17</span> these are only<sup><a id="n5100233" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100233">33</a></sup> the shadow of the things to come, but the reality<sup><a id="n5100234" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100234">34</a></sup> is Christ!<sup><a id="n5100235" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100235">35</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:18</span> Let no one who delights in false humility<sup><a id="n5100236" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100236">36</a></sup> and the worship of angels pass judgment on you. That person goes on at great lengths<sup><a id="n5100237" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100237">37</a></sup> about what he has supposedly seen, but he is puffed up with empty notions by his fleshly mind.<sup><a id="n5100238" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100238">38</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:19</span> He has not held fast<sup><a id="n5100239" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100239">39</a></sup> to the head from whom the whole body, supported<sup><a id="n5100240" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100240">40</a></sup> and knit together through its ligaments and sinews, grows with a growth that is from God.<sup><a id="n5100241" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100241">41</a></sup> </p>
<p class="bodytext"><span class="verse">2:20</span> If you have died with Christ to the elemental spirits<sup><a id="n5100242" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100242">42</a></sup> of the world, why do you submit to them as though you lived in the world? <span class="verse">2:21</span> “Do not handle! Do not taste! Do not touch!” <span class="verse">2:22</span> These are all destined to perish with use, founded as they are<sup><a id="n5100243" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100243">43</a></sup> on human commands and teachings.<sup><a id="n5100244" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100244">44</a></sup> <span class="verse">2:23</span> Even though they have the appearance of wisdom<sup><a id="n5100245" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100245">45</a></sup> with their self-imposed worship and humility achieved by an<sup><a id="n5100246" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100246">46</a></sup> unsparing treatment of the body—a wisdom with no true value—they in reality result in fleshly indulgence.<sup><a id="n5100247" href="file1160_notes.xhtml#n5100247">47</a></sup> </p>

</body>
</html>