<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for James 4</h2>
<p id="n590041"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n590041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “where” is repeated in Greek for emphasis.</p></p>
<p id="n590042"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n590042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from here.”</p></p>
<p id="n590043"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n590043">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in your members [i.e., parts of the body].”</p></p>
<p id="n590044"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n590044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “is hostility toward God.”</p></p>
<p id="n590045"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n590045">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “vainly says.”</p></p>
<p id="n590046"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n590046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (God) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n590047"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n590047">7</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Byzantine text and a few other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (P 5 33 436 442 1243 1611 1735 1852 2344 2492 <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have the intransitive <span class="greek">κατῴκησεν</span> (<span class="translit">katōkēsen</span>) here, which turns <span class="greek">τὸ πνεῦμα</span> (<span class="translit">to pneuma</span>) into the subject of the verb: “The spirit which lives within us.” But the more reliable and older witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>74</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 049 1241 1739 <i>al</i>) have the causative verb, <span class="greek">κατῴκισεν</span> (<span class="translit">katōkisen</span>), which implies a different subject and <span class="greek">τὸ πνεῦμα</span> as the object: “The spirit that he causes to live within us.” Both because of the absence of an explicit subject and the relative scarcity of the causative <span class="greek">κατοικίζω</span> (<span class="translit">katoikizō</span>, “cause to dwell”) compared to the intransitive <span class="greek">κατοικέω</span> (<span class="translit">katoikeō</span>, “live, dwell”) in biblical Greek (<span class="greek">κατοικίζω</span> does not occur in the NT at all, and occurs much less frequently than <span class="greek">κατοικέω</span> in the LXX), it is easy to see why scribes would replace <span class="greek">κατῴκισεν</span> with <span class="greek">κατῴκησεν</span>. Thus, on internal and external grounds, <span class="greek">κατῴκισεν</span> is the preferred reading.</p></p>
<p id="n590048"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n590048">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Interpreters debate the referent of the word “spirit” in this verse: (1) The translation takes “spirit” to be the lustful capacity within people that produces a divided mind (1:8, 14) and inward conflicts regarding God (4:1-4). God has allowed it to be in man since the fall, and he provides his grace (v. 6) and the new birth through the gospel message (1:18-25) to counteract its evil effects. (2) On the other hand the word “spirit” may be taken positively as the Holy Spirit and the sense would be, “God yearns jealously for the Spirit he caused to live within us.” But the word for “envious” or “jealous” is generally negative in biblical usage and the context before and after seems to favor the negative interpretation.</p><p><b>sn</b> No OT verse is worded exactly this way. This is either a statement about the general teaching of scripture or a quotation from an ancient translation of the Hebrew text that no longer exists today.</p></p>
<p id="n590049"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n590049">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Prov 3:34.</p></p>
<p id="n5900410"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900410">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “two-minded” (the same description used in 1:8).</p></p>
<p id="n5900411"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900411">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> This term and the following one are preceded by <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) in the Greek text, but contemporary English generally uses connectives only between the last two items in such a series.</p></p>
<p id="n5900412"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900412">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “let your laughter be turned.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900413"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900413">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:2.</p></p>
<p id="n5900414"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900414">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> See note on the word “believer” in 1:9.</p></p>
<p id="n5900415"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900415">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a judge.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900416"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900416">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who judges your neighbor.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900417"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900417">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “city.” </p></p>
<p id="n5900418"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900418">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who” (continuing the description of the people of v. 13). Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n5900419"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900419">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you do not know what your life will be like tomorrow.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900420"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900420">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “a vapor.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἀτμίς</span> (<span class="translit">atmis</span>) denotes a swirl of smoke arising from a fire (cf. Gen 19:28; Lev 16:13; Joel 2:30 [Acts 2:19]; Ezek 8:11).</p></p>
<p id="n5900421"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900421">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “instead of your saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900422"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900422">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but now.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900423"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900423">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “you boast in your arrogance.” The translation in the text is based on two points: (1) The verb <span class="greek">καυχάομαι</span> (<span class="translit">kauchaomai</span>, “boast”) often uses the preposition <span class="greek">ἐν</span> (<span class="translit">en</span>) to indicate the focus of the boast (see BDAG 536 s.v. 1). (2) <span class="greek">ἀλαζονεία</span> (<span class="translit">alazoneia</span>, “arrogance”) here is plural and likely refers to the specific plans mentioned in v. 13.</p></p>
<p id="n5900424"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900424">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “knows how to do what is good.”</p></p>
<p id="n5900425"><a href="file1209.xhtml#n5900425">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to him it is sin.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
