<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Mark 12</h2>
<p id="n410121"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n410121">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410122"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n410122">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>vineyard</i> is a figure for Israel in the OT (Isa 5:1-7). The nation and its leaders are the tenants, so the vineyard here may well refer to the promise that resides within the nation. The imagery is like that in Rom 11:11-24.</p></p>
<p id="n410123"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n410123">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n410124"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n410124">4</a> <p><b>sn</b> The leasing of land to <i>tenant farmers</i> was common in this period.</p></p>
<p id="n410125"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n410125">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the word “slave” in 10:44.</p><p><b>sn</b> This <i>slave</i> (along with the others) represent the prophets God sent to the nation, who were mistreated and rejected.</p></p>
<p id="n410126"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n410126">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the tenants,” but this is redundant in English, so the pronoun (“them”) was used in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n410127"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n410127">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the fruits of the vineyard.”</p></p>
<p id="n410128"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n410128">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n410129"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n410129">9</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But they”; the referent (the tenants, v. 1) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101210"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101210">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seizing him, they beat and sent away empty-handed.” The referent of the direct object of “seizing” (the slave sent by the owner) has been specified in the translation for clarity. The objects of the verbs “beat” and “sent away” have been supplied in the translation to conform to English style. Greek often omits direct objects when they are clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4101211"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101211">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> The image of the <i>tenants</i> beating up the owner’s slave pictures the nation’s rejection of the prophets and their message.</p></p>
<p id="n4101212"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101212">12</a> <p><b>sn</b> The slaves being sent <i>empty-handed</i> suggests that the vineyard was not producing any fruit—and thus neither was the nation of Israel.</p></p>
<p id="n4101213"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101213">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the tenants’ mistreatment of the first slave.</p></p>
<p id="n4101214"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101214">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “one beloved son.” See comment at Mark 1:11.</p><p><b>sn</b> The owner’s decision to send his <i>one dear son</i> represents God sending Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4101215"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101215">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101216"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101216">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “seizing him.” The participle <span class="greek">λαβόντες</span> (<span class="translit">labontes</span>) has been translated as attendant circumstance.</p></p>
<p id="n4101217"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101217">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101218"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101218">18</a> <p><b>sn</b> Throwing the heir’s body <i>out of the vineyard</i> pictures Jesus’ death outside of Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n4101219"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101219">19</a> <p><b>sn</b> The statement that the owner will <i>come and destroy those tenants</i> is a promise of judgment; see Luke 13:34-35; 19:41-44.</p></p>
<p id="n4101220"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101220">20</a> <p><b>sn</b> The warning that the owner would <i>give the vineyard to others</i> suggests that the care of the promise and the nation’s hope would be passed to others. This eventually looks to Gentile inclusion; see Eph 2:11-22.</p></p>
<p id="n4101221"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101221">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “capstone,” “keystone.” Although these meanings are lexically possible, the imagery in Eph 2:20-22 and 1 Cor 3:11 indicates that the term <span class="greek">κεφαλὴ γωνίας</span> (<span class="translit">kephalē gōnias</span>) refers to a cornerstone, not a capstone.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone</i>. The use of Ps 118:22-23 and the “stone imagery” as a reference to Christ and his suffering and exaltation is common in the NT (see also Matt 21:42; Luke 20:17; Acts 4:11; 1 Pet 2:6-8; cf. also Eph 2:20). The irony in the use of Ps 118:22-23 in Mark 12:10-11 is that in the OT, Israel was the one rejected (or perhaps her king) by the Gentiles, but in the NT it is Jesus who is rejected by Israel.</p></p>
<p id="n4101222"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101222">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 118:22-23.</p></p>
<p id="n4101223"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101223">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to introduce a somewhat parenthetical remark by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4101224"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101224">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of previous action(s) in the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101225"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101225">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point of the parable in Mark 12:1-12 is that the leaders of the nation have been rejected by God and the <i>vineyard</i> (v. 9, referring to the nation and its privileged status) will be taken from them and given <i>to others</i> (an allusion to the Gentiles).</p></p>
<p id="n4101226"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101226">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101227"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101227">27</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 2:16.</p></p>
<p id="n4101228"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101228">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Pharisees and Herodians</i> made a very interesting alliance. W. W. Wessel (“Mark,” <i>EBC</i> 8:733) comments: “The Herodians were as obnoxious to the Pharisees on political grounds as the Sadducees were on theological grounds. Yet the two groups united in their opposition to Jesus. Collaboration in wickedness, as well as goodness, has great power. Their purpose was to trip Jesus up in his words so that he would lose the support of the people, leaving the way open for them to destroy him.” See also the note on “Herodians” in Mark 3:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4101229"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101229">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “trap him in word.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101230"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101230">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and it is not a concern to you about anyone because you do not see the face of men.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101231"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101231">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Teach the way of God in accordance with the truth</i>. Very few comments are as deceitful as this one; they did not really believe this at all. The question of the Pharisees and Herodians was specifically designed to trap Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4101232"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101232">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “lawful,” that is, in accordance with God’s divine law. On the syntax of <span class="greek">ἔξεστιν</span> (<span class="translit">exestin</span>) with an infinitive and accusative, see BDF §409.3.</p></p>
<p id="n4101233"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101233">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> According to L&amp;N 57.180 the term <span class="greek">κῆνσος</span> (<span class="translit">kēnsos</span>) was borrowed from Latin and referred to a poll tax, a tax paid by each adult male to the Roman government.</p><p><b>sn</b> This question concerning <i>taxes</i> was specifically designed to trap Jesus. If he answered yes, then his opponents could publicly discredit him as a sympathizer with Rome. If he answered no, then they could go to the Roman governor and accuse Jesus of rebellion.</p></p>
<p id="n4101234"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101234">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the emperor” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p></p>
<p id="n4101235"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101235">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Aware of their hypocrisy he said.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101236"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101236">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the specific name of the coin was retained in the translation, because not all coins in circulation in Palestine at the time carried the image of Caesar. In other places <span class="greek">δηνάριον</span> (<span class="translit">dēnarion</span>) has been translated simply as “silver coin” with an explanatory note.</p><p><b>sn</b> A <i>denarius</i> was a silver coin stamped with the image of the emperor and worth approximately one day’s wage for a laborer.</p></p>
<p id="n4101237"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101237">37</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate their response to Jesus’ request for a coin.</p></p>
<p id="n4101238"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101238">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “whose likeness.”</p><p><b>sn</b> In this passage Jesus points to the <i>image</i> (<i>Grk</i> <span class="greek">εἰκών</span>, <span class="translit">eikōn</span>) of Caesar on the coin. This same Greek word is used in Gen 1:26 (LXX) to state that humanity is made in the “image” of God. Jesus is making a subtle yet powerful contrast: Caesar’s image is on the denarius, so he can lay claim to money through taxation, but God’s image is on humanity, so he can lay claim to each individual life.</p></p>
<p id="n4101239"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101239">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they said to him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101240"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101240">40</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ answer to <i>give to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s</i> was a both/and, not the questioners’ either/or. So he slipped out of their trap.</p></p>
<p id="n4101241"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101241">41</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>Sadducees</i> controlled the official political structures of Judaism at this time, being the majority members of the Sanhedrin. They were known as extremely strict on law and order issues (Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 2.8.2 [2.119], 2.8.14 [2.164-166]; <i>Ant</i>. 13.5.9 [13.171-173], 13.10.6 [13.293-298], 18.1.2 [18.11], 18.1.4 [18.16-17], 20.9.1 [20.199]; <i>Life</i> 2 [10-11]). They also did not believe in resurrection or in angels, an important detail in v. 25. See also Matt 3:7; 16:1-12; 22:23-34; Luke 20:27-38; Acts 4:1; 5:17; 23:6-8.</p></p>
<p id="n4101242"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101242">42</a> <p><b>sn</b> This remark is best regarded as a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4101243"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101243">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and asked him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4101244"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101244">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his brother”; but this would be redundant in English with the same phrase “his brother” at the end of the verse, so most modern translations render this phrase “the man” (so NIV, NRSV). </p></p>
<p id="n4101245"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101245">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> The use of <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) with imperatival force is unusual (BDF §470.1).</p></p>
<p id="n4101246"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101246">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “raise up seed” (an idiom for fathering children).</p></p>
<p id="n4101247"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101247">47</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 25:5. This practice is called levirate marriage (see also Ruth 4:1-12; Mishnah, <i>m. Yevamot;</i> Josephus<i>, Ant</i>. 4.8.23 [4.254-256]). The levirate law is described in Deut 25:5-10. The brother of a man who died without a son had an obligation to marry his brother’s widow. This served several purposes: It provided for the widow in a society where a widow with no children to care for her would be reduced to begging, and it preserved the name of the deceased, who would be regarded as the legal father of the first son produced from that marriage.</p></p>
<p id="n4101248"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101248">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “took a wife” (an idiom for marrying a woman).</p></p>
<p id="n4101249"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101249">49</a> <p><b>tc</b> The words “when they rise again” are missing from several significant witnesses (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C D L W <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 33 579 892 c r<sup>1</sup> k sy<sup>p</sup> co). They are included in A <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,(13)</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat sy<sup>s,h</sup>. The strong external pedigree of the shorter reading gives one pause. Nevertheless, the Alexandrian and other <span class="smcaps">mss</span> most likely dropped the words from the text either to conform the wording to the parallel in Matt 22:28 or because “when they rise again” was redundant. But the inclusion of these words is thoroughly compatible with Mark’s usually pleonastic style (see <i>TCGNT</i> 93), and therefore most probably authentic to Mark’s Gospel.</p></p>
<p id="n4101250"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101250">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For the seven had her as wife.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101251"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101251">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “mistaken” (cf. BDAG 822 s.v. <span class="greek">πλανάω</span> 2.c.<span class="greek">γ</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4101252"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101252">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Angels</i> do not die, nor do they eat according to Jewish tradition (<i>1 En</i>. 15:6; 51:4; Wis 5:5; <i>2 Bar</i>. 51:10; 1QH 3.21-23).</p></p>
<p id="n4101253"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101253">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now as for the dead that they are raised.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101254"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101254">54</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Exod 3:6. Jesus used a common form of rabbinic citation here to refer to the passage in question.</p></p>
<p id="n4101255"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101255">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and the,” but <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated since English normally uses a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series of three or more.</p></p>
<p id="n4101256"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101256">56</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 3:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4101257"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101257">57</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He is not God of the dead but of the living</i>. Jesus’ point was that if God could identify himself as God of the three old patriarchs, then they must still be alive when God spoke to Moses; and so they must be raised.</p></p>
<p id="n4101258"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101258">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n4101259"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101259">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “One of the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4101260"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101260">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101261"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101261">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “You will love.” The future indicative is used here with imperatival force (see <i>ExSyn</i> 452 and 569).</p></p>
<p id="n4101262"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101262">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 6:4-5 and Josh 22:5 (LXX). The fourfold reference to different parts of the person says, in effect, that one should love God with all one’s being.</p></p>
<p id="n4101263"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101263">63</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 19:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4101264"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101264">64</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 4:35.</p></p>
<p id="n4101265"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101265">65</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 6:5.</p></p>
<p id="n4101266"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101266">66</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Lev 19:18.</p></p>
<p id="n4101267"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101267">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>kingdom of God</i> is a major theme of Jesus’ teaching. The nature of the kingdom of God in the NT and in Jesus’ teaching has long been debated by interpreters and scholars, with discussion primarily centering around the nature of the kingdom (earthly, heavenly, or both) and the kingdom’s arrival (present, future, or both). An additional major issue concerns the relationship between the kingdom of God and the person and work of Jesus himself.</p></p>
<p id="n4101268"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101268">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “that the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4101269"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101269">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “the Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 8:29.</p></p>
<p id="n4101270"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101270">70</a> <p><b>sn</b> It was a common belief in Judaism that Messiah would be <i>David’s son</i> in that he would come from the lineage of David. On this point the Pharisees agreed and were correct. But their understanding was nonetheless incomplete, for Messiah is also David’s Lord. With this statement Jesus was affirming that, as the Messiah, he is both God and man. </p></p>
<p id="n4101271"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101271">71</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Lord said to my lord</i>. With David being the speaker, this indicates his respect for his descendant (referred to as <i>my lord</i>). Jesus was arguing, as the ancient exposition assumed, that the passage is about the Lord’s anointed. The passage looks at an enthronement of this figure and a declaration of honor for him as he takes his place at the side of God. In Jerusalem, the king’s palace was located to the right of the temple to indicate this kind of relationship. Jesus was pressing the language here to get his opponents to reflect on how great Messiah is.</p></p>
<p id="n4101272"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101272">72</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 110:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4101273"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101273">73</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “David himself calls him ‘Lord.’ So how is he his son?” The conditional nuance, implicit in Greek, has been made explicit in the translation (cf. Matt 22:45).</p></p>
<p id="n4101274"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101274">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4101275"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101275">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “for the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 1:22.</p></p>
<p id="n4101276"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101276">76</a> <p><b>tn</b> In Greek this is the only infinitive in vv. 38-39. It would be awkward in English to join an infinitive to the following noun clauses, so this has been translated as a gerund.</p></p>
<p id="n4101277"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101277">77</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is later Jewish material in the Talmud that spells out such <i>greetings</i> in detail. See H. Windisch, <i>TDNT</i> 1:498.</p></p>
<p id="n4101278"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101278">78</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>marketplaces</i> in Mark 6:56.</p></p>
<p id="n4101279"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101279">79</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogue</i> in 1:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4101280"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101280">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who,” continuing the sentence begun in v. 38. </p></p>
<p id="n4101281"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101281">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “houses,” “households”; however, the term can have the force of “property” or “possessions” as well (O. Michel, <i>TDNT</i> 5:131; BDAG 695 s.v. <span class="greek">οἶκια</span> 1.a).</p></p>
<p id="n4101282"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101282">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4101283"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101283">83</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, predominantly of the Western and Byzantine texts (A D W <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 2542 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), have <span class="greek">ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς</span> (<span class="translit">ho Iēsous</span>, “Jesus”) as the explicit subject here, while <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L <span class="greek">Δ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> 892 lack the name. A natural scribal tendency is to expand the text, especially to add the Lord’s name as the explicit subject of a verb. Scribes much less frequently omitted the Lord’s name (cf. the readings of W <span class="greek">Θ</span> 565 1424 in Mark 12:17). The internal and external evidence support one another here in behalf of the shorter reading. </p></p>
<p id="n4101284"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101284">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> On the term <span class="greek">γαζοφυλάκιον</span> (<span class="translit">gazophulakion</span>), often translated “treasury,” see BDAG 186 s.v., which states, “For Mk 12:41, 43; Lk 21:1 the mng. <i>contribution box</i> or <i>receptacle</i> is attractive. Acc. to Mishnah, Shekalim 6, 5 there were in the temple 13 such receptacles in the form of trumpets. But even in these passages the general sense of ‘treasury’ is prob., for the contributions would go [into] the treasury via the receptacles.” Based upon the extra-biblical evidence (see <b>sn</b> following), however, the translation opts to refer to the actual receptacles and not the treasury itself.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>offering box</i> probably refers to the receptacles in the temple forecourt by the Court of Women used to collect freewill offerings. These are mentioned by Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 5.5.2 (5.200); 6.5.2 (6.282); <i>Ant</i>. 19.6.1 (19.294), and in 1 Macc 14:49 and 2 Macc 3:6, 24, 28, 40 (see also Luke 21:1; John 8:20).</p></p>
<p id="n4101285"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101285">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> These <i>two small copper coins</i> were lepta (sing. “lepton”), the smallest and least valuable coins in circulation in Palestine, worth one-half of a quadrans or 1/128 of a denarius, or about six minutes of an average daily wage. This was next to nothing in value.</p></p>
<p id="n4101286"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101286">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Truly (<span class="greek">ἀμήν</span>, <span class="translit">amēn</span>), I say to you.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101287"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101287">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> See the note on the term “offering box” in v. 41.</p></p>
<p id="n4101288"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101288">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Has put more into the offering box than all the others</i>. With God, giving is weighed evaluatively, not counted. The widow was praised because she gave sincerely and at some considerable cost to herself.</p></p>
<p id="n4101289"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101289">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “out of what abounded to them.”</p></p>
<p id="n4101290"><a href="file1010.xhtml#n4101290">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> The contrast between this passage, 12:41-44, and what has come before in 11:27-12:40 is remarkable. The woman is set in stark contrast to the religious leaders. She was a poor widow, they were rich. She was uneducated in the law, they were well educated in the law. She was a woman, they were men. But whereas they evidenced no faith and actually stole money from God and men (cf. 11:17), she evidenced great faith and gave out of her extreme poverty <i>everything she had</i>. </p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
