<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 1 Corinthians 4</h2>
<p id="n460041"><a href="file1112.xhtml#n460041">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is both indefinite and general, “one”; “a person” (BDAG 81 s.v. 4.a.<span class="greek">γ</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n460042"><a href="file1112.xhtml#n460042">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “time, until the Lord comes, who will bring to light.”</p></p>
<p id="n460043"><a href="file1112.xhtml#n460043">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “praise.”</p></p>
<p id="n460044"><a href="file1112.xhtml#n460044">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “brothers.” See note on the phrase “brothers and sisters” in 1:10.</p></p>
<p id="n460045"><a href="file1112.xhtml#n460045">5</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Several significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span> read <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">Iēsou</span>, “Jesus”) after <span class="greek">Χριστῷ</span> (<span class="translit">Christō</span>, “Christ”) in v. 17 (so <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>46</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> C D<sup>1</sup> 33 1739 <i>al</i>). Western <span class="smcaps">mss</span> have <span class="greek">κυρίῳ ᾿Ιησοῦ</span> (<span class="translit">kuriō Iēsou</span>, “Lord Jesus”; D* F G), while several significant <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, as well as the majority, have only <span class="greek">Χριστῷ</span> here (A B D<sup>2</sup> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> <span class="apparatus">M</span> sa). Once <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> got into the text, it would continue to be copied. There is however no easy explanation for the word lacking in so many witnesses. Thus the shorter reading appears to be autographic. NA<sup>28</sup> includes <span class="greek">᾿Ιησοῦ</span> in brackets, indicating doubt as to its authenticity. </p></p>
<p id="n460046"><a href="file1112.xhtml#n460046">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “puffed up”; “inflated.”</p></p>
<p id="n460047"><a href="file1112.xhtml#n460047">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “rod.” Context indicates that this rod will be used for disciplinary purposes.</p><p><b>sn</b> Paul is using the term <i>rod</i> in this context to refer to his apostolic authority to discipline those who have become arrogant in the Corinthian church and have attempted to undermine his ministry (cf. 4:18-19).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
