<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 20</h2>
<p id="n420201"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n420201">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that one.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated. Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “now” to indicate the transition to a new topic.</p></p>
<p id="n420202"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n420202">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n420203"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n420203">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the temple.”</p></p>
<p id="n420204"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n420204">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “preaching.”</p></p>
<p id="n420205"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n420205">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n420206"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n420206">6</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The chief priests and the experts in the law with the elders came up</i>. The description is similar to Luke 19:47. The leaders are really watching Jesus at this point.</p></p>
<p id="n420207"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n420207">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and said, saying to him.” This is redundant in English and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n420208"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n420208">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this phrase, see BDAG 844 s.v. <span class="greek">ποῖος</span> 2.a.<span class="greek">γ</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n420209"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n420209">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> The leadership is looking back to acts like the temple cleansing (19:45-48). How could a Galilean preacher do <i>these things</i>?</p></p>
<p id="n4202010"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202010">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, he said to them.” This is redundant in English and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4202011"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202011">11</a> <p><b>sn</b> John, like Jesus, was not a part of the official rabbinic order. So the question “<i>John’s baptism—was it from heaven or from men?</i>” draws an analogy between John the Baptist and Jesus. See Luke 3:1-20; 7:24-27. The phrase <i>John’s baptism</i> refers to the baptism practiced by John.</p></p>
<p id="n4202012"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202012">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> The plural Greek term <span class="greek">ἀνθρώπων</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpōn</span>) is used here (and in v. 6) in a generic sense, referring to both men and women (cf. NAB, NRSV, “of human origin”; TEV, “from human beings”; NLT, “merely human”).</p><p><b>sn</b> The question is whether John’s ministry was of divine or human origin.</p></p>
<p id="n4202013"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202013">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of Jesus’ question.</p></p>
<p id="n4202014"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202014">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the dilemma Jesus’ opponents faced.</p></p>
<p id="n4202015"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202015">15</a> <p><b>sn</b> Very few questions could have so completely revealed the wicked intentions of the religious leaders. Jesus’ question revealed the motivation of the religious leaders and exposed them for what they really were—hypocrites. They indicted themselves when they cited only two options and chose neither of them. The point of Luke 20:1-8 is that no matter what Jesus said in response to their question they were not going to believe it and would in the end use it against him.</p></p>
<p id="n4202016"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202016">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202017"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202017">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Neither will I tell you</i>. Though Jesus gave no answer, the analogy he used to their own question makes his view clear. His authority came from heaven.</p></p>
<p id="n4202018"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202018">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this phrase, see BDAG 844 s.v. <span class="greek">ποῖος</span> 2.a.<span class="greek">γ</span>. This is exactly the same phrase as in v. 2.</p></p>
<p id="n4202019"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202019">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative. The parable Jesus tells here actually addresses the question put to him by the leaders.</p></p>
<p id="n4202020"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202020">20</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ There are several variants here, most of which involve variations in word order that do not affect translation. However, the presence or absence of <span class="greek">τις</span> (<span class="translit">tis</span>) after <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>), which would be translated “a certain man,” does affect translation. The witnesses that have <span class="greek">τις</span> include A W <span class="greek">Θ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> 1241 2542 <i>al</i> sy. Those that lack it include <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B C D L <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> it. Externally, the evidence is significantly stronger for the omission. Internally, however, there is some pause. A feature unique to Luke-Acts in the NT is to use the construction <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος τις</span> (cf. 10:30; 12:16; 14:2, 16; 15:11; 16:1; 19:12; Acts 9:33). However, scribes who were familiar with this idiom may have inserted it here. In light of the overwhelming external support for the omission of <span class="greek">τις</span>, the shorter reading is preferred. NA<sup>28</sup> places <span class="greek">τις</span> in brackets, indicating some doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202021"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202021">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>vineyard</i> is a figure for Israel in the OT (Isa 5:1-7). The nation and its leaders are the tenants, so the vineyard here may well refer to the promise that resides within the nation. The imagery is like that in Rom 11:11-24.</p></p>
<p id="n4202022"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202022">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> The leasing of land to <i>tenant farmers</i> was common in this period.</p></p>
<p id="n4202023"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202023">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> This <i>slave</i> (along with the next two) represent the prophets God sent to the nation, who were mistreated and rejected.</p></p>
<p id="n4202024"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202024">24</a> <p><b>tc</b> Instead of the future indicative <span class="greek">δώσουσιν</span> (<span class="translit">dōsousin</span>, “they will give”), most witnesses (C D W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span>) have the aorist subjunctive <span class="greek">δῶσιν</span> (<span class="translit">dōsin</span>, “they might give”). The aorist subjunctive is expected following <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>, “so that”), so it is almost surely a motivated reading. Further, early and excellent witnesses, as well as a few others (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> A B ƒ<sup>13</sup> 33 579 1241 2542 <i>al</i>), have <span class="greek">δώσουσιν</span>. It is thus more likely that the future indicative is authentic. For a discussion of this construction, see BDF §369.2.</p></p>
<p id="n4202025"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202025">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “from the fruit of the vineyard.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202026"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202026">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (the slave sent by the owner) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p><p><b>sn</b> The image of the <i>tenants</i> beating up the owner’s slave pictures the nation’s rejection of the prophets and their message.</p></p>
<p id="n4202027"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202027">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the tenants’ mistreatment of the first slave.</p></p>
<p id="n4202028"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202028">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> The slaves being sent <i>empty-handed</i> suggests that the vineyard was not producing any fruit—and thus neither was the nation of Israel.</p></p>
<p id="n4202029"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202029">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the tenants’ mistreatment of the first two slaves.</p></p>
<p id="n4202030"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202030">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202031"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202031">31</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “my beloved son.” See comment at Luke 3:22. </p><p><b>sn</b> The owner’s decision to send his <i>one dear son</i> represents God sending Jesus. </p></p>
<p id="n4202032"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202032">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the implied result of the tenants’ decision to kill the son.</p></p>
<p id="n4202033"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202033">33</a> <p><b>sn</b> Throwing the heir <i>out of the vineyard</i> pictures Jesus’ death outside of Jerusalem.</p></p>
<p id="n4202034"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202034">34</a> <p><b>sn</b> The statement that the owner will <i>come and destroy those tenants</i> is a promise of judgment; see Luke 13:34-35; 19:41-44. </p></p>
<p id="n4202035"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202035">35</a> <p><b>sn</b> The warning that the owner would <i>give the vineyard to others</i> suggests that the care of the promise and the nation’s hope would be passed to others. This eventually looks to Gentile inclusion; see Eph 2:11-22.</p></p>
<p id="n4202036"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202036">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “they”; the referent (the people addressed in v. 9) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202037"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202037">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>May this never happen!</i> Jesus’ audience got the point and did not want to consider a story where the nation would suffer judgment.</p></p>
<p id="n4202038"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202038">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202039"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202039">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “capstone,” “keystone.” Although these meanings are lexically possible, the imagery in Eph 2:20-22 and 1 Cor 3:11 indicates that the term <span class="greek">κεφαλὴ γωνίας</span> (<span class="translit">kephalē gōnias</span>) refers to a cornerstone, not a capstone.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone</i>. The use of Ps 118:22-23 and the “stone imagery” as a reference to Christ and his suffering and exaltation is common in the NT (see also Matt 21:42; Mark 12:10; Acts 4:11; 1 Pet 2:6-8; cf. also Eph 2:20). The irony in the use of Ps 118:22-23 here is that in the OT, Israel was the one rejected (or perhaps her king) by the Gentiles, but in the NT it is Jesus who is rejected by Israel.</p></p>
<p id="n4202040"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202040">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term, see BDAG 972 s.v. <span class="greek">συνθλάω</span>.</p></p>
<p id="n4202041"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202041">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “on whomever it falls, it will crush him.”</p><p><b>sn</b> This proverb basically means that the <i>stone</i> crushes, without regard to whether it falls on someone or someone falls on it. On the stone as a messianic image, see Isa 28:16 and Dan 2:44-45.</p></p>
<p id="n4202042"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202042">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202043"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202043">43</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “The scribes” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4202044"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202044">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “tried to lay hands on him.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202045"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202045">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n4202046"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202046">46</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202047"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202047">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “righteous,” but in this context the point is their false sincerity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202048"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202048">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “so that they might catch him in some word.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202049"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202049">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> This word is often translated “authority” in other contexts, but here, in combination with <span class="greek">ἀρχή</span> (<span class="translit">archē</span>), it refers to the domain or sphere of the governor’s rule (L&amp;N 37.36).</p></p>
<p id="n4202050"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202050">50</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “thus” to indicate the implied result of the plans by the spies.</p></p>
<p id="n4202051"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202051">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “precisely”; <i>Grk</i> “rightly.” Jesus teaches exactly, the straight and narrow.</p></p>
<p id="n4202052"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202052">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Teach the way of God in accordance with the truth</i>. Very few comments are as deceitful as this one; they did not really believe this at all. The question was specifically designed to trap Jesus.</p></p>
<p id="n4202053"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202053">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “lawful,” that is, in accordance with God’s divine law. On the syntax of <span class="greek">ἔξεστιν</span> (<span class="translit">exestin</span>) with an infinitive and accusative, see BDF §409.3.</p></p>
<p id="n4202054"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202054">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> This was a “poll tax.” L&amp;N 57.182 states this was “a payment made by the people of one nation to another, with the implication that this is a symbol of submission and dependence—‘tribute tax.’”</p></p>
<p id="n4202055"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202055">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to the emperor” (“Caesar” is a title for the Roman emperor).</p></p>
<p id="n4202056"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202056">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4202057"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202057">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “craftiness.” The term always has negative connotations in the NT (1 Cor 3:19; 2 Cor 4:2; 11:3; Eph 4:14).</p></p>
<p id="n4202058"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202058">58</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here the specific name of the coin was retained in the translation, because not all coins in circulation in Palestine at the time carried the image of Caesar. In other places <span class="greek">δηνάριον</span> (<span class="translit">dēnarion</span>) has been translated simply as “silver coin” with an explanatory note.</p><p><b>sn</b> A <i>denarius</i> was a silver coin worth approximately one day’s wage for a laborer. The fact that the leaders had such a coin showed that they already operated in the economic world of Rome. The denarius would have had a picture of Tiberius Caesar, the Roman emperor, on it.</p></p>
<p id="n4202059"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202059">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “whose likeness.”</p><p><b>sn</b> In this passage Jesus points to the <i>image</i> (<i>Grk</i> <span class="greek">εἰκών</span>, <span class="translit">eikōn</span>) of Caesar on the coin. This same Greek word is used in Gen 1:26 (LXX) to state that humanity is made in the “image” of God. Jesus is making a subtle yet powerful contrast: Caesar’s image is on the denarius, so he can lay claim to money through taxation, but God’s image is on humanity, so he can lay claim to each individual life.</p></p>
<p id="n4202060"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202060">60</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “whose likeness and inscription does it have?”</p></p>
<p id="n4202061"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202061">61</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that Jesus’ pronouncement results from the opponents’ answer to his question.</p></p>
<p id="n4202062"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202062">62</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ answer to <i>give to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s and to God the things that are God’s</i> was a both/and, not the questioners’ either/or. So he slipped out of their trap.</p></p>
<p id="n4202063"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202063">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “thus” to indicate the implied result of Jesus’ unexpected answer.</p></p>
<p id="n4202064"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202064">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this term, see BDAG 374 s.v. <span class="greek">ἐπιλαμβάνομαι</span> 3.</p></p>
<p id="n4202065"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202065">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to trap him in a saying.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202066"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202066">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “amazed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202067"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202067">67</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>Sadducees</i> controlled the official political structures of Judaism at this time, being the majority members of the Sanhedrin. They were known as extremely strict on law and order issues (Josephus, <i>J. W</i>. 2.8.2 [2.119], 2.8.14 [2.164-166]; <i>Ant</i>. 13.5.9 [13.171-173], 13.10.6 [13.293-298], 18.1.2 [18.11], 18.1.4 [18.16-17], 20.9.1 [20.199]; <i>Life</i> 2 [10-11]). They also did not believe in resurrection or in angels, an important detail in v. 36. See also Matt 3:7; 16:1-12; 22:23-34; Mark 12:18-27; Acts 4:1; 5:17; 23:6-8.</p></p>
<p id="n4202068"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202068">68</a> <p><b>sn</b> This remark is best regarded as a parenthetical note by the author.</p></p>
<p id="n4202069"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202069">69</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “asked him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>) is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4202070"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202070">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “his brother,” but this would be redundant in English with the same phrase “his brother” at the end of the verse, so most modern translations render this phrase “the man” (so NIV, NRSV).</p></p>
<p id="n4202071"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202071">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> The use of <span class="greek">ἵνα</span> (<span class="translit">hina</span>) with imperatival force is unusual (BDF §470.1).</p></p>
<p id="n4202072"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202072">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and raise up seed,” an idiom for procreating children (L&amp;N 23.59).</p></p>
<p id="n4202073"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202073">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Deut 25:5. Because the OT quotation does not include “a wife” as the object of the verb, it has been left as normal type. This practice is called levirate marriage (see also Ruth 4:1-12; Mishnah, <i>m. Yevamot;</i> Josephus<i>, Ant</i>. 4.8.23 [4.254-256]). The levirate law is described in Deut 25:5-10. The brother of a man who died without a son had an obligation to marry his brother’s widow. This served several purposes: It provided for the widow in a society where a widow with no children to care for her would be reduced to begging, and it preserved the name of the deceased, who would be regarded as the legal father of the first son produced from that marriage.</p></p>
<p id="n4202074"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202074">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “took a wife” (an idiom for marrying a woman).</p></p>
<p id="n4202075"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202075">75</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A W <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat) have the words, “took the wife and this one died childless” after “the second.” But this looks like a clarifying addition, assimilating the text to Mark 12:21. In light of the early and diverse witnesses that lack the expression (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B D L 0266 892 1241 co), the shorter reading should be considered authentic.</p></p>
<p id="n4202076"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202076">76</a> <p><b>sn</b> The point is a dilemma. In a world arguing a person should have one spouse, whose <i>wife</i> will she be in the afterlife? The question was designed to show that (in the opinion of the Sadducees) resurrection leads to a major problem. </p></p>
<p id="n4202077"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202077">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For the seven had her as wife.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202078"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202078">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that Jesus’ response is a result of their framing of the question.</p></p>
<p id="n4202079"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202079">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sons of this age” (an idiom, see L&amp;N 11.16). The following clause which refers to being “given in marriage” suggests both men and women are included in this phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n4202080"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202080">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to attain to.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202081"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202081">81</a> <p><b>sn</b> Life in the age to come is different than life here (they <i>neither marry nor are given in marriage</i>). This means Jesus’ questioners had made a false assumption that life was the same both now and in the age to come.</p></p>
<p id="n4202082"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202082">82</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Angels</i> do not die, nor do they eat according to Jewish tradition (<i>1 En</i>. 15:6; 51:4; Wis 5:5; <i>2 Bar</i>. 51:10; 1QH 3.21-23).</p></p>
<p id="n4202083"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202083">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sons of God, being.” The participle <span class="greek">ὄντες</span> (<span class="translit">ontes</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle here.</p></p>
<p id="n4202084"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202084">84</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “people.” The noun <span class="greek">υἱός</span> (<span class="translit">huios</span>) followed by the genitive of class or kind (“sons of…”) denotes a person of a class or kind, specified by the following genitive construction. This Semitic idiom is frequent in the NT (L&amp;N 9.4).</p></p>
<p id="n4202085"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202085">85</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But that the dead are raised even Moses revealed.”</p></p>
<p id="n4202086"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202086">86</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Exod 3:6. Jesus used a common form of rabbinic citation here to refer to the passage in question.</p></p>
<p id="n4202087"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202087">87</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Exod 3:6.</p></p>
<p id="n4202088"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202088">88</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>He is not God of the dead but of the living</i>. Jesus’ point was that if God could identify himself as God of the three old patriarchs, then they must still be alive when God spoke to Moses; and so they must be raised.</p></p>
<p id="n4202089"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202089">89</a> <p><b>tn</b> On this syntax, see BDF §192. The point is that all live “to” God or “before” God.</p></p>
<p id="n4202090"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202090">90</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4202091"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202091">91</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “some of the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n4202092"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202092">92</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Teacher, you have spoken well!</i> The scribes, being Pharisees, were happy for the defense of resurrection and angels, which they (unlike the Sadducees) believed in.</p></p>
<p id="n4202093"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202093">93</a> <p><b>sn</b> The attempt to show Jesus as ignorant had left the experts silenced. At this point <i>they did not dare any longer to ask him anything</i>.</p></p>
<p id="n4202094"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202094">94</a> <p><b>sn</b> If the religious leaders will not dare to question Jesus any longer, then he will question them.</p></p>
<p id="n4202095"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202095">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Messiah”; both “Christ” (Greek) and “Messiah” (Hebrew and Aramaic) mean “one who has been anointed.”</p><p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Christ</i> in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n4202096"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202096">96</a> <p><b>sn</b> It was a common belief in Judaism that Messiah would be <i>David’s son</i> in that he would come from the lineage of David. On this point the Pharisees agreed and were correct. But their understanding was nonetheless incomplete, for Messiah is also David’s Lord. With this statement Jesus was affirming that, as the Messiah, he is both God and man.</p></p>
<p id="n4202097"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202097">97</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The Lord said to my lord</i>. With David being the speaker, this indicates his respect for his descendant (referred to as <i>my lord</i>). Jesus was arguing, as the ancient exposition assumed, that the passage is about the Lord’s anointed. The passage looks at an enthronement of this figure and a declaration of honor for him as he takes his place at the side of God. In Jerusalem, the king’s palace was located to the right of the temple to indicate this kind of relationship. Jesus was pressing the language here to get his opponents to reflect on how great Messiah is.</p></p>
<p id="n4202098"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202098">98</a> <p><b>sn</b> A quotation from Ps 110:1.</p></p>
<p id="n4202099"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n4202099">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “David thus calls him ‘Lord.’ So how is he his son?” The conditional nuance, implicit in Greek, has been made explicit in the translation (cf. Matt 22:45).</p></p>
<p id="n42020100"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n42020101"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42020102"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Be on guard against.” This is a present imperative and indicates that pride is something to constantly be on the watch against.</p></p>
<p id="n42020103"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “of the scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n42020104"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who,” continuing the sentence begun by the prior phrase.</p></p>
<p id="n42020105"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020105">105</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is later Jewish material in the Talmud that spells out such <i>greetings</i> in detail. See D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> (BECNT), 2:1642; H. Windisch, <i>TDNT</i> 1:498.</p></p>
<p id="n42020106"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020106">106</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>marketplace</i> in Luke 7:32.</p></p>
<p id="n42020107"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020107">107</a> <p><b>sn</b> See Luke 14:7-14.</p></p>
<p id="n42020108"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020108">108</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>synagogues</i> in 4:15.</p></p>
<p id="n42020109"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020109">109</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “who,” continuing the sentence begun in v. 46.</p></p>
<p id="n42020110"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020110">110</a> <p><b>sn</b> How they were able to <i>devour widows’ houses</i> is debated. Did they seek too much for contributions, or take too high a commission for their work, or take homes after debts failed to be paid? There is too little said here to be sure.</p></p>
<p id="n42020111"><a href="file1035.xhtml#n42020111">111</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “houses,” “households”; however, the term can have the force of “property” or “possessions” as well (O. Michel, <i>TDNT</i> 5:131; BDAG 695 s.v. <span class="greek">οἶκια</span> 1.a).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
