<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for 2 Timothy 3</h2>
<p id="n550031"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n550031">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or perhaps, “dangerous,” “fierce.”</p></p>
<p id="n550032"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n550032">2</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “men,” but here <span class="greek">ἄνθρωποι</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpoi</span>) is generic, referring to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n550033"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n550033">3</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “self-centered.” The first two traits in 2 Tim 3:2 and the last two in 3:4 are Greek words beginning with the root “lovers of,” and so bracket the list at beginning and end.</p></p>
<p id="n550034"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n550034">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “form.”</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>Outward appearance</i>. Paul’s contrast with power in 3:5b shows that he regards this “form” to be outward, one of <i>appearance</i> rather than reality (cf. 1 Cor 4:19-20; 1 Thess 1:5).</p></p>
<p id="n550035"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n550035">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and avoid these,” with the word “people” implied.</p></p>
<p id="n550036"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n550036">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “For from these are those who sneak.”</p></p>
<p id="n550037"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n550037">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “silly women.”</p></p>
<p id="n550038"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n550038">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “always learning,” continuing the description of the women from v. 6. Because of the length and complexity of the Greek sentence, a new sentence was started here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n550039"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n550039">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Jannes and Jambres</i> were the traditional names of two of Pharaoh’s magicians who opposed Moses at the time of the Exodus.</p></p>
<p id="n5500310"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500310">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “disapproved concerning the faith.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500311"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500311">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “for they will not progress any more.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500312"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500312">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “as theirs came to be,” referring to the foolishness of Jannes and Jambres. The referent of “theirs” (Jannes and Jambres) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n5500313"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500313">13</a> <p><b>sn</b> There is a strong emphasis on the pronoun <i>you</i> in contrast to the people described in vv. 2-9.</p></p>
<p id="n5500314"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500314">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The possessive “my” occurs only at the beginning of the list but is positioned in Greek to apply to each of the words in the series.</p></p>
<p id="n5500315"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500315">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “persecutions, sufferings,” as a continuation of the series from v. 10.</p></p>
<p id="n5500317"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500317">17</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>In Antioch, in Iconium, and in Lystra</i>. See Acts 13-14 for the account of these persecutions.</p></p>
<p id="n5500318"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500318">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “will advance to the worse.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500319"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500319">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “deceiving and being deceived.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500320"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500320">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but you, continue,” a command.</p></p>
<p id="n5500321"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500321">21</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “knowing,” giving the reasons for continuing as v. 14 calls for.</p></p>
<p id="n5500322"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500322">22</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “those from whom you learned.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500323"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500323">23</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “All scripture.”</p><p><b>sn</b> There is very little difference in sense between <i>every scripture</i> (emphasizing the individual portions) and “all scripture” (emphasizing the composite whole). The former option is preferred, because it fits the normal use of the word “all/every” in Greek (<span class="greek">πᾶς</span>, <span class="translit">pas</span>) as well as Paul’s normal sense for the word “scripture” in the singular without the article, as here. So <i>every scripture</i> means “every individual portion of scripture.”</p></p>
<p id="n5500324"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500324">24</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Inspired by God</i>. Some have connected this adjective in a different way and translated it as “every inspired scripture is also useful.” But this violates the parallelism of the two adjectives in the sentence, and the arrangement of words makes clear that both should be taken as predicate adjectives: “<i>every scripture is inspired…and useful</i>.” </p></p>
<p id="n5500325"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500325">25</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “rebuke,” “censure.” The Greek word implies exposing someone’s sin in order to bring correction.</p></p>
<p id="n5500326"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500326">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the man of God,” but <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is most likely used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women.</p></p>
<p id="n5500327"><a href="file1183.xhtml#n5500327">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> This word is positioned for special emphasis; it carries the sense of “complete, competent, able to meet all demands.”</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
