<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" 
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
<title>NET Bible 2.1</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Notes for Luke 5</h2>
<p id="n420051"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n420051">1</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Now it happened that.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n420052"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n420052">2</a> <p><b>sn</b> The <i>Lake of Gennesaret</i> is another name for the Sea of Galilee. Cf. the parallel in Matt 4:18.</p></p>
<p id="n420053"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n420053">3</a> <p><b>sn</b> The image of the crowd <i>pressing around him</i> suggests the people leaning forward to catch Jesus’ every word.</p></p>
<p id="n420054"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n420054">4</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And he.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n420055"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n420055">5</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Getting into”; the participle <span class="greek">ἐμβάς</span> (<span class="translit">embas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n420056"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n420056">6</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n420057"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n420057">7</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n420058"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n420058">8</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “sitting down”; the participle <span class="greek">καθίσας</span> (<span class="translit">kathisas</span>) has been translated as a finite verb due to requirements of contemporary English style.</p></p>
<p id="n420059"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n420059">9</a> <p><b>sn</b> In 1986 following a period of drought and low lake levels, a fishing boat from the first century was discovered on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee. It was excavated and preserved and can now be seen in the Yigal Allon Museum in Kibbutz Ginosar north of Tiberias. The remains of the boat are 27 ft (8.27 m) long and 7.5 ft (2.3 m) wide; it could be rowed by four rowers and had a mast for a sail. The boat is now known as the “Jesus boat” or the “Sea of Galilee boat” although there is no known historical connection of any kind with Jesus or his disciples. However, the boat is typical for the period and has provided archaeologists with much information about design and construction of boats on the Sea of Galilee in the first century.</p></p>
<p id="n4200510"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200510">10</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “let down.” The verb here is plural, so this is a command to all in the boat, not just Peter.</p></p>
<p id="n4200511"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200511">11</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Simon.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200512"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200512">12</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, Simon said.” This is redundant in contemporary English and has been simplified in the translation to “Simon answered.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200513"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200513">13</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word <span class="greek">ἐπιστάτης</span> is a term of respect for a person of high status (see L&amp;N 87.50). </p></p>
<p id="n4200514"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200514">14</a> <p><b>tn</b> The expression “at your word,” which shows Peter’s obedience, stands first in the Greek clause for emphasis.</p></p>
<p id="n4200515"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200515">15</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “let down.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200516"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200516">16</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And when.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200517"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200517">17</a> <p><b>tn</b> In context, this imperfect verb is best taken as an ingressive imperfect.</p></p>
<p id="n4200518"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200518">18</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate consequential nature of the action.</p></p>
<p id="n4200519"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200519">19</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, “they signaled by making gestures” (L&amp;N 33.485).</p></p>
<p id="n4200520"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200520">20</a> <p><b>tn</b> This infinitive conveys the idea that the boats were at the point of sinking (BDF §338.1).</p></p>
<p id="n4200521"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200521">21</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Lord</i> is a term of high respect in this context. God’s presence in the work of Jesus makes Peter recognize his authority. This vocative is common in Luke (20 times), but does not yet have its full confessional force.</p></p>
<p id="n4200522"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200522">22</a> <p><b>sn</b> Peter was intimidated that someone who was obviously working with divine backing was in his presence (“<i>Go away from me</i>”). He feared his sinfulness might lead to judgment, but Jesus would show him otherwise.</p></p>
<p id="n4200523"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200523">23</a> <p><b>sn</b> An explanatory conjunction (<i>For</i>) makes it clear that Peter’s exclamation is the result of a surprising set of events. He speaks, but the others feel similarly.</p></p>
<p id="n4200524"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200524">24</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Peter) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200525"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200525">25</a> <p><b>sn</b> In the Greek text, this term is in an emphatic position.</p></p>
<p id="n4200526"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200526">26</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “business associates.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200527"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200527">27</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200528"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200528">28</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>From now on</i> is a common Lukan expression, see Luke 1:48.</p></p>
<p id="n4200529"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200529">29</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek term <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> (<span class="translit">anthrōpos</span>) is used here in a generic sense, referring to both men and women, thus “people.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The kind of fishing envisioned was net—not line—fishing, which involved a circular net that had heavy weights around its perimeter. The occupation of fisherman was labor-intensive. The imagery of using a lure and a line (and waiting for the fish to strike) is thus foreign to this text. Rather, the imagery of a fisherman involved much strain, long hours, and often little results. Jesus’ point may have been one or more of the following: the strenuousness of evangelism, the work ethic that it required, persistence and dedication to the task (often in spite of minimal results), the infinite value of the new “catch” (viz., people), and perhaps an eschatological theme of snatching people from judgment (cf. W. L. Lane, <i>Mark</i> [NICNT], 67; D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> [BECNT], 1:461). If this last motif is in view, then catching people is the opposite of catching fish: The fish would be caught, killed, cooked, and eaten; people would be caught so as to remove them from eternal destruction and to give them new life. With the statement “<i>You will be catching people</i>” Jesus turns the miracle into a metaphor for mission. </p></p>
<p id="n4200530"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200530">30</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the result of Jesus’ pronouncement.</p></p>
<p id="n4200531"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200531">31</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>left everything and followed him</i> pictures discipleship, which means that to learn from Jesus is to follow him as the guiding priority of one’s life.</p></p>
<p id="n4200532"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200532">32</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that while.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4200533"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200533">33</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200534"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200534">34</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “cities.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200535"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200535">35</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “towns, behold, a man covered with leprosy.” The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>, “behold”) has not been translated because it has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1).</p></p>
<p id="n4200536"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200536">36</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “full of leprosy” (an idiom for a severe condition).</p></p>
<p id="n4200537"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200537">37</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>lepers</i> in Luke 4:27.</p></p>
<p id="n4200538"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200538">38</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And seeing.” Because of the difference between Greek style, which often begins sentences or clauses with “and,” and English style, which generally does not, <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has not been translated here. The participle <span class="greek">ἰδών</span> (<span class="translit">idōn</span>) has been taken temporally.</p></p>
<p id="n4200539"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200539">39</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he fell on his face”; an idiom for bowing down with one’s face to the ground.</p></p>
<p id="n4200540"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200540">40</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and begged him, saying.” The participle <span class="greek">λέγων</span> (<span class="translit">legōn</span>) is redundant in English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4200541"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200541">41</a> <p><b>tn</b> This is a third class condition. The report portrays the leper making no presumptions about whether Jesus will heal him or not.</p></p>
<p id="n4200542"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200542">42</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate the response of Jesus to the man’s request.</p></p>
<p id="n4200543"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200543">43</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Touched</i>. This touch would have rendered Jesus ceremonially unclean (Lev 14:46; also Mishnah, <i>m. Nega’im</i> 3.1; 11.1; 12.1; 13.6-12).</p></p>
<p id="n4200544"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200544">44</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200545"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200545">45</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (the man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200546"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200546">46</a> <p><b>sn</b> The silence <i>ordered</i> by Jesus was probably meant to last only until the cleansing took place with the priests and sought to prevent Jesus’ healings from becoming the central focus of the people’s reaction to him. See also 4:35, 41; 8:56 for other cases where Jesus asks for silence with reference to miracles.</p></p>
<p id="n4200547"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200547">47</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “commanded him” are not in the Greek text but have been supplied for clarity. This verse moves from indirect to direct discourse. This abrupt change is very awkward, so the words have been supplied to smooth out the transition.</p></p>
<p id="n4200548"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200548">48</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Going, show.” The participle <span class="greek">ἀπελθών</span> (<span class="translit">apelthōn</span>) has been translated as an attendant circumstance participle. Here the syntax also changes somewhat abruptly from indirect discourse to direct discourse.</p></p>
<p id="n4200549"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200549">49</a> <p><b>tn</b> The words “the offering” are not in the Greek text, but are implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4200550"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200550">50</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the phrase <i>as Moses commanded</i> see Lev 14:1-32.</p></p>
<p id="n4200551"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200551">51</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “as an indictment against them”; or “as proof to the people.” This phrase could be taken as referring to a positive witness to the priests, a negative testimony against them, or as a testimony to the community that the man had indeed been cured. In any case, the testimony shows that Jesus is healing and ministering to those in need.</p></p>
<p id="n4200552"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200552">52</a> <p><b>sn</b> That is, in spite of Jesus’ instructions to the man to tell no one about the healing (v. 14).</p></p>
<p id="n4200553"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200553">53</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “him” is not in the Greek text, but is implied. Direct objects were frequently omitted in Greek when clear from the context.</p></p>
<p id="n4200554"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200554">54</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">αὐτός</span> (<span class="translit">autos</span>) has been translated reflexively.</p></p>
<p id="n4200555"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200555">55</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “was withdrawing” (<span class="greek">ἦν ὑποχωρῶν</span>, <span class="translit">ēn hupochōrōn</span>). The adverb “frequently” has been added in the translation to bring out what is most likely an iterative force to the imperfect. However, the imperfect might instead portray an ingressive idea: “he began to withdraw.” See <i>ExSyn</i> 542-43.</p></p>
<p id="n4200556"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200556">56</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “desert.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200557"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200557">57</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And it happened that on.” The introductory phrase <span class="greek">ἐγένετο</span> (<span class="translit">egeneto</span>, “it happened that”), common in Luke (69 times) and Acts (54 times), is redundant in contemporary English and has not been translated.</p></p>
<p id="n4200558"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200558">58</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Pharisees</i> were members of one of the most important and influential religious and political parties of Judaism in the time of Jesus. There were more Pharisees than Sadducees (according to Josephus, <i>Ant</i>. 17.2.4 [17.42] there were more than 6,000 Pharisees at about this time). Pharisees differed with Sadducees on certain doctrines and patterns of behavior. The Pharisees were strict and zealous adherents to the laws of the OT and to numerous additional traditions such as angels and bodily resurrection.</p></p>
<p id="n4200559"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200559">59</a> <p><b>tn</b> That is, those who were skilled in the teaching and interpretation of the OT law. These are called “experts in the law” (<i>Grk</i> “scribes”) in v. 21.</p></p>
<p id="n4200560"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200560">60</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus was now attracting attention outside of Galilee as far away as <i>Jerusalem</i>, the main city of Israel.</p></p>
<p id="n4200561"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200561">61</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A C D [K] <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt bo) read <span class="greek">αὐτούς</span> (<span class="translit">autous</span>) instead of <span class="greek">αὐτόν</span> (<span class="translit">auton</span>) here. If original, this plural pronoun would act as the direct object of the infinitive <span class="greek">ἰᾶσθαι</span> (<span class="translit">iasthai</span>, “to heal”). However, the reading with the singular pronoun <span class="greek">αὐτόν</span>, which acts as the subject of the infinitive, is to be preferred. Externally, it has support from better <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L W <i>al</i> sa). Internally, it is probable that scribes changed the singular <span class="greek">αὐτόν</span> to the plural <span class="greek">αὐτούς</span>, expecting the object of the infinitive to come at this point in the text. The singular as the harder reading accounts for the rise of the other reading.</p></p>
<p id="n4200562"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200562">62</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And behold.” Here <span class="greek">καὶ</span> <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span> <span class="translit">idou</span>) has been translated as “just then” to indicate the somewhat sudden appearance of the men carrying the paralytic. The Greek word <span class="greek">ἰδού</span> (<span class="translit">idou</span>) has no exact English equivalent here, but adds interest and emphasis (BDAG 468 s.v. 1), especially in conjunction with the suddenness of the stretcher-bearers’ appearance.</p></p>
<p id="n4200563"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200563">63</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “a man who was paralyzed”; the relative clause in Greek has adjectival force and has been simplified to a simple adjective in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4200564"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200564">64</a> <p><b>tn</b> Traditionally, “on a bed,” but this could be confusing to the modern reader who might envision a large piece of furniture. In various contexts, <span class="greek">κλίνη</span> (<span class="translit">klinē</span>) may be translated “bed, couch, cot, stretcher, or bier” (in the case of a corpse). See L&amp;N 6.106.</p></p>
<p id="n4200565"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200565">65</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “stretcher, and.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style. Instead, because of the tendency of contemporary English to use shorter sentences, a new sentence was begun here in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4200566"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200566">66</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200567"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200567">67</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the contrast implied in the context: They wanted to bring the man to Jesus, but found no way.</p></p>
<p id="n4200568"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200568">68</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “But finding.” The participle <span class="greek">εὑρόντες</span> (<span class="translit">heurontes</span>) has been translated as a causal adverbial participle.</p></p>
<p id="n4200569"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200569">69</a> <p><b>sn</b> A house in 1st century Palestine would have had a flat roof with stairs or a ladder going up. This access was often from the outside of the house.</p></p>
<p id="n4200570"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200570">70</a> <p><b>tn</b> This word, <span class="greek">κλινίδιον</span> (<span class="translit">klinidion</span>), is a different Greek word than the one used in the previous verse (<span class="greek">κλίνη</span>, <span class="translit">klinē</span>). In this context both may be translated “stretcher” (see L&amp;N 6.106 and 6.107).</p></p>
<p id="n4200571"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200571">71</a> <p><b>tn</b> There is a translational problem at this point in the text. The term Luke uses is <span class="greek">κέραμος</span> (<span class="translit">keramos</span>). It can in certain contexts mean “clay,” but usually this is in reference to pottery (see BDAG 540 s.v. 1). The most natural definition in this instance is “roof tile” (used in the translation above). However, tiles were generally not found in Galilee. Recent archaeological research has suggested that this house, which would have probably been typical for the area, could not have supported “a second story, nor could the original roof have been masonry; no doubt it was made from beams and branches of trees covered with a mixture of earth and straw” (J. F. Strange and H. Shanks, “Has the House Where Jesus Stayed in Capernaum Been Found?” <i>BAR</i> 8, no. 6 [Nov/Dec 1982]: 34). Luke may simply have spoken of building materials that would be familiar to his readers.</p></p>
<p id="n4200572"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200572">72</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “in the midst.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200573"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200573">73</a> <p><b>sn</b> The phrase <i>right in front of Jesus</i> trailing as it does at the end of the verse is slightly emphatic, adding a little note of drama: What would Jesus do?</p></p>
<p id="n4200574"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200574">74</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200575"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200575">75</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200576"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200576">76</a> <p><b>sn</b> The plural pronoun <i>their</i> makes it clear that Jesus was responding to the faith of the entire group, not just the paralyzed man.</p></p>
<p id="n4200577"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200577">77</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Man,” but the term used in this way was not derogatory in Jewish culture. Used in address (as here) it means “friend” (see BDAG 82 s.v. <span class="greek">ἄνθρωπος</span> 8).</p></p>
<p id="n4200578"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200578">78</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “Man, your sins are forgiven you.” Luke stresses the forgiveness of sins (cf. 1:77; 3:3; 24:47). In 5:20 he uses both the perfect <span class="greek">ἀφέωνται</span> and the personal pronoun <span class="greek">σοι</span> which together combine to heighten the subjective aspect of the experience of forgiveness. The <span class="greek">σοι</span> has been omitted in translation in light of normal English style.</p><p><b>sn</b> The passive voice here is a divine passive (<i>ExSyn</i> 437). It is clear that God does the forgiving.</p></p>
<p id="n4200579"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200579">79</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200580"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200580">80</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “Then the scribes.” The traditional rendering of <span class="greek">γραμματεύς</span> (<span class="translit">grammateus</span>) as “scribe” does not communicate much to the modern English reader, for whom the term might mean “professional copyist,” if it means anything at all. The people referred to here were recognized experts in the law of Moses and in traditional laws and regulations. Thus “expert in the law” comes closer to the meaning for the modern reader.</p></p>
<p id="n4200581"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200581">81</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “to reason” (in a hostile sense). See G. Schrenk, <i>TDNT</i> 2:97.</p></p>
<p id="n4200582"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200582">82</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participle <span class="greek">λέγοντες</span> (<span class="translit">legontes</span>, “saying”) has not been translated because it is redundant in contemporary English.</p></p>
<p id="n4200583"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200583">83</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “this one” (<span class="greek">οὗτος</span>, <span class="translit">houtos</span>).</p></p>
<p id="n4200584"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200584">84</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Uttering blasphemies</i> in the NT has a somewhat broader meaning than mere exclamations or pronouncements. It could mean to say something that dishonored God, but it could also involve claims to divine prerogatives (in this case, to forgive sins on God’s behalf). Such claims were viewed as usurping God’s majesty or honor. The remark here raised directly the issue of the nature of Jesus’ ministry, and even more importantly, the identity of Jesus himself as God’s representative.</p></p>
<p id="n4200585"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200585">85</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus often <i>perceived</i> people’s thoughts in Luke; see 4:23; 6:8; 7:40; 9:47. Such a note often precedes a rebuke.</p></p>
<p id="n4200586"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200586">86</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “reasonings.” This is the noun form of the infinitive <span class="greek">διαλογίζεσθαι</span> (<span class="translit">dialogizesthai</span>, “began to reason to themselves”) used in v. 21. Jesus’ reply to them in the latter part of the present verse makes clear that these reasonings were mental and internal, so the translation “thoughts” was used here. On the hostile or evil nature of these thoughts, see G. Schrenk, <i>TDNT</i> 2:97.</p></p>
<p id="n4200587"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200587">87</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “answering, he said to them.” This construction with passive participle and finite verb is pleonastic (redundant) and has been simplified in the translation.</p></p>
<p id="n4200588"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200588">88</a> <p><b>tn</b> The Greek verb <span class="greek">διαλογίζεσθε</span> (<span class="translit">dialogizesthe</span>, “you reason”), used in context with <span class="greek">διαλογισμούς</span> (<span class="translit">dialogismous</span>, “reasonings”), connotes more than neutral reasoning or thinking. While the verb can refer to normal “reasoning,” “discussion,” or “reflection” in the NT, its use here in Luke 5:22, alongside the noun—which is regularly used with a negative sense in the NT (cf. Matt 15:19; Mark 7:21; Luke 2:35; 6:8; 9:47; Rom 1:21; 1 Cor 3:20; G. Schrenk, <i>TDNT</i> 2:96-97; D. L. Bock, <i>Luke</i> [BECNT], 1:484)—suggests the idea of “contention.” Therefore, in order to reflect the hostility evident in the reasoning of the Pharisees and teachers of the law, the verb has been translated as “raising objections.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200589"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200589">89</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Which is easier</i> is a reflective kind of question. On the one hand to declare sins are forgiven is easier, since one does not need to see it, unlike telling a paralyzed person to walk. On the other hand, it is harder, because for it to be true one must possess the authority to forgive the sin.</p></p>
<p id="n4200590"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200590">90</a> <p><b>sn</b> Now Jesus put the two actions together. The walking of the man would be proof (<i>so that you may know</i>) that his sins were forgiven and that God had worked through Jesus (i.e., the <i>Son of Man</i>).</p></p>
<p id="n4200591"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200591">91</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>Son of Man</i>, which is a title in Greek, comes from a pictorial description in Dan 7:13 of one “like a son of man” (i.e., a human being). It is Jesus’ favorite way to refer to himself. Jesus did not reveal the background of the term here, which mixes human and divine imagery as the man in Daniel rides a cloud, something only God does. He just used it. It also could be an idiom in Aramaic meaning either “some person” or “me.” So there is a little ambiguity in its use here, since its origin is not clear at this point. However, the action makes it clear that Jesus used it to refer to himself here.</p></p>
<p id="n4200592"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200592">92</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to the one who was paralyzed”; the Greek participle is substantival and has been simplified to a simple adjective and noun in the translation.</p><p><b>sn</b> Jesus did not finish his sentence with words but with action, that is, healing the paralytic with an accompanying pronouncement to him directly.</p></p>
<p id="n4200593"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200593">93</a> <p><b>tn</b> This word, <span class="greek">κλινίδιον</span> (<span class="translit">klinidion</span>), is the same as the one used in v. 19. In this context it may be translated “stretcher” (see L&amp;N 6.107).</p></p>
<p id="n4200594"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200594">94</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “to your house.”</p></p>
<p id="n4200595"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200595">95</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And immediately.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n4200596"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200596">96</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and picked up.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because contemporary English normally places a coordinating conjunction only between the last two elements in a series.</p></p>
<p id="n4200597"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200597">97</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “picked up what he had been lying on”; the referent of the relative pronoun (the stretcher) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n4200598"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200598">98</a> <p><b>sn</b> Note the man’s response, <i>glorifying God</i>. Joy at God’s work is also a key theme in Luke: 2:20; 4:15; 5:26; 7:16; 13:13; 17:15; 18:43; 23:47.</p></p>
<p id="n4200599"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n4200599">99</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42005100"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005100">100</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “amazement.” See L&amp;N 25.217, which translates this clause, “astonishment seized all of them.”</p></p>
<p id="n42005101"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005101">101</a> <p><b>tn</b> This imperfect verb could be translated as an ingressive (“they began to glorify God”), but this is somewhat awkward in English since the following verb is aorist and is normally translated as a simple past.</p></p>
<p id="n42005102"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005102">102</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “fear,” but the context and the following remark show that it is mixed with wonder; see L&amp;N 53.59.</p></p>
<p id="n42005103"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005103">103</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “remarkable.” The term <span class="greek">παράδοξος</span> (<span class="translit">paradoxos</span>) is hard to translate exactly; it suggests both the unusual and the awe inspiring in this context. For the alternatives see L&amp;N 31.44 (“incredible”) and 58.56 (“remarkable”). It is often something beyond belief (G. Kittel, <i>TDNT</i> 2:255).</p></p>
<p id="n42005104"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005104">104</a> <p><b>tn</b> The word “things” is not in the Greek text, but has been supplied because the adjective <span class="greek">παράδοξος</span> (<span class="translit">paradoxos</span>) is substantival. Other translations sometimes supply alternate words like “miracles” or “signs,” but “things” is the most neutral translation.</p></p>
<p id="n42005105"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005105">105</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>today</i> in 2:11.</p></p>
<p id="n42005106"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005106">106</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And after.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42005107"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005107">107</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he”; the referent (Jesus) has been supplied in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42005108"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005108">108</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>tax collectors</i> in 3:12.</p></p>
<p id="n42005109"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005109">109</a> <p><b>sn</b> It is possible that <i>Levi</i> is a second name for Matthew, because people often used alternative names in 1st century Jewish culture.</p></p>
<p id="n42005110"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005110">110</a> <p><b>tn</b> While “tax office” is sometimes given as a translation for <span class="greek">τελώνιον</span> (<span class="translit">telōnion</span>; so L&amp;N 57.183), this could give the modern reader a false impression of an indoor office with all its associated furnishings.</p><p><b>sn</b> The <i>tax booth</i> was a booth located at a port or on the edge of a city or town to collect taxes for trade. These taxes were a form of customs duty or toll applied to the movement of goods and produce brought into an area for sale. As such these tolls were a sort of “sales tax” paid by the seller but obviously passed on to the purchaser in the form of increased prices (L&amp;N 57.183). The system as a whole is sometimes referred to as “tax farming” because a contract to collect these taxes for an entire district would be sold to the highest bidder, who would pay up front, hire employees to do the work of collection, and then recoup the investment and overhead by charging commissions on top of the taxes. Although rates and commissions were regulated by law, there was plenty of room for abuse in the system through the subjective valuation of goods by the tax collectors, and even through outright bribery. Tax overseers and their employees were obviously not well liked. There was a tax booth in Capernaum, which was on the trade route from Damascus to Galilee and the Mediterranean. It was here that Jesus met Levi (also named Matthew [see Matt 9:9]) who, although indirectly employed by the Romans, was probably more directly responsible to Herod Antipas, the tetrarch of Galilee appointed by Rome. It was Levi’s job to collect customs duties for Rome and he was thus despised by his fellow Jews, many of whom would have regarded him as a traitor.</p></p>
<p id="n42005111"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005111">111</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Follow me</i>. For similar calls on the part of Jesus see Luke 5:10-11; 9:23, 59; 18:22.</p></p>
<p id="n42005112"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005112">112</a> <p><b>sn</b> On the phrase <i>leaving everything</i> see Luke 5:10-11; 14:33.</p></p>
<p id="n42005113"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005113">113</a> <p><b>tn</b> The participial phrase “leaving everything behind” occurs at the beginning of the sentence, but has been transposed to the end in the translation for logical reasons, since it serves to summarize Levi’s actions.</p></p>
<p id="n42005114"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005114">114</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42005115"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005115">115</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>A great banquet</i> refers to an elaborate meal. Many of the events in Luke take place in the context of meal fellowship: 7:36-50; 9:12-17; 10:38-42; 11:37-54; 14:1-24; 22:7-38; 24:29-32, 41-43.</p></p>
<p id="n42005116"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005116">116</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “him”; the referent (Jesus) has been specified in the translation for clarity.</p></p>
<p id="n42005117"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005117">117</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “reclining.” This term reflects the normal practice in 1st century Jewish culture of eating a meal in a semi-reclining position. Since it is foreign to most modern readers, the translation “sitting” has been substituted.</p></p>
<p id="n42005118"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005118">118</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “but” to indicate the implied contrast present in this context.</p></p>
<p id="n42005119"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005119">119</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n42005120"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005120">120</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “and their scribes.” See the note on the phrase “experts in the law” in 5:21.</p></p>
<p id="n42005121"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005121">121</a> <p><b>tn</b> Or “grumbled”; a term often used in the OT for inappropriate grumbling: Exod 15:24; 16:7-8; Num 14:2, 26-35; 16:11.</p></p>
<p id="n42005122"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005122">122</a> <p><b>sn</b> The issue here is inappropriate associations (<i>eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners</i>) and the accusation comes not against Jesus, but his disciples.</p></p>
<p id="n42005123"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005123">123</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “And Jesus.” Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has not been translated because of differences between Greek and English style.</p></p>
<p id="n42005124"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005124">124</a> <p><b>sn</b> Jesus’ point is that he associates with <i>those who are sick</i> because they have the need and will respond to the offer of help. A person who is <i>well</i> (or who thinks mistakenly that he is) will not seek treatment.</p></p>
<p id="n42005125"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005125">125</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>I have not come</i> is another commission statement by Jesus; see 4:43-44.</p></p>
<p id="n42005126"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005126">126</a> <p><b>sn</b> Though parallels exist to this saying (Matt 9:13; Mark 2:17), only Luke has this last phrase <i>but sinners to repentance</i>. Repentance is a frequent topic in Luke’s Gospel: 3:3, 8; 13:1-5; 15:7, 10; 16:30; 17:3-4; 24:47.</p></p>
<p id="n42005127"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005127">127</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>) has been translated as “then” to indicate the implied sequence of events within the narrative.</p></p>
<p id="n42005128"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005128">128</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (<span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span>*<sup>,2</sup> A C D <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy) read <span class="greek">διὰ τί</span> (<span class="translit">dia ti</span>, “<i>Why</i> do John’s…?”) here, turning the statement into a question. But such seems to be a motivated reading, assimilating the text to Mark 2:18 and Matt 9:14. The reading represented in the translation is supported by <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>4</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>1</sup> B L W <span class="greek">Ξ</span> 33 892* 1241 sa.</p><p><b>sn</b> <i>John</i> refers to John the Baptist.</p></p>
<p id="n42005129"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005129">129</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>John’s disciples</i> and <i>the disciples of the Pharisees</i> followed typical practices with regard to fasting and prayer. Many Jews fasted regularly (Lev 16:29-34; 23:26-32; Num 29:7-11). The zealous fasted twice a week on Monday and Thursday.</p></p>
<p id="n42005130"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005130">130</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “and offer prayers,” but this idiom (<span class="greek">δέησις</span> + <span class="greek">ποιέω</span>) is often simply a circumlocution for praying.</p></p>
<p id="n42005131"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005131">131</a> <p><b>sn</b> See the note on <i>Pharisees</i> in 5:17.</p></p>
<p id="n42005132"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005132">132</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “but yours are eating and drinking.” The translation “continue to eat and drink” attempts to reflect the progressive or durative nature of the action described, which in context is a practice not limited to the specific occasion at hand (the banquet).</p></p>
<p id="n42005133"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005133">133</a> <p><b>tn</b> Here <span class="greek">δέ</span> (<span class="translit">de</span>) has been translated as “so” to indicate that Jesus’ pronouncement is a result of their statements about his disciples.</p></p>
<p id="n42005134"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005134">134</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “the sons of the wedding hall,” an idiom referring to guests at the wedding, or more specifically, friends of the bridegroom present at the wedding celebration (L&amp;N 11.7).</p></p>
<p id="n42005135"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005135">135</a> <p><b>sn</b> The expression <i>while the bridegroom is with them</i> is an allusion to messianic times (John 3:29; Isa 54:5-6; 62:4-5).</p></p>
<p id="n42005136"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005136">136</a> <p><b>tn</b> Questions prefaced with <span class="greek">μή</span> (<span class="translit">mē</span>) in Greek anticipate a negative answer. This can sometimes be indicated by using a “tag” at the end in English (here it is “can you?”).</p></p>
<p id="n42005137"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005137">137</a> <p><b>sn</b> The statement <i>when the bridegroom is taken from them</i> is a veiled allusion by Jesus to his death, which he did not make explicit until the incident at Caesarea Philippi in 9:18ff.</p></p>
<p id="n42005138"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005138">138</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “then in those days.”</p></p>
<p id="n42005139"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005139">139</a> <p><b>sn</b> The term <i>parable</i> in a Semitic context can cover anything from a long story to a brief wisdom saying. Here it is the latter.</p></p>
<p id="n42005140"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005140">140</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “puts,” but since the means of attachment would normally be sewing, the translation “sews” has been used.</p></p>
<p id="n42005141"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005141">141</a> <p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “he tears.” The point is that the new garment will be ruined to repair an older, less valuable one.</p></p>
<p id="n42005142"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005142">142</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>The piece from the new will not match the old</i>. The imagery in this saying looks at the fact that what Jesus brings is so <i>new</i> that it cannot simply be combined with the <i>old</i>. To do so would be to destroy what is new and to put together something that does not fit.</p></p>
<p id="n42005143"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005143">143</a> <p><b>sn</b> <i>Wineskins</i> were bags made of skin or leather, used for storing wine in NT times. As the new wine fermented and expanded, it would stretch the new wineskins. Putting new (unfermented) wine in old wineskins, which had already been stretched, would result in the bursting of the wineskins.</p></p>
<p id="n42005144"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005144">144</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> (A C [D] <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>13</sup> <span class="apparatus">M</span> latt sy) have <span class="greek">καὶ ἀμφότεροι συντηροῦνται</span> (<span class="translit">kai amphoteroi suntērountai</span>, “and both will be preserved”), assimilating the text to Matt 9:17. The earliest and best witnesses, as well as many others (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>4,75vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L W ƒ<sup>1</sup> 33 579 700 1241 2542 co), however, lack the words.</p><p><b>sn</b> The meaning of the saying <i>new wine…into new skins</i> is that the presence and teaching of Jesus was something new and signaled the passing of the old. It could not be confined within the old religion of Judaism, but involved the inauguration and consummation of the kingdom of God.</p></p>
<p id="n42005145"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005145">145</a> <p><b>tc</b> The Western textual tradition (D it) lacks <b>5:39</b>. The verse is unique to Luke, so the omission by these witnesses looks like assimilation to the other synoptic accounts.</p></p>
<p id="n42005146"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005146">146</a> <p><b>tc</b> ‡ Although most <span class="smcaps">mss</span> begin the verse with <span class="greek">καί</span> (<span class="translit">kai</span>, “and”), beginning the sentence without a conjunction is both a harder reading and is found in early and significant witnesses (<span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>4,75vid</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span><sup>2</sup> B 579 700 892 1241). NA<sup>28</sup> puts the word in brackets indicating doubts as to its authenticity.</p></p>
<p id="n42005147"><a href="file1020.xhtml#n42005147">147</a> <p><b>tc</b> Most <span class="smcaps">mss</span>, especially the later ones (A C <span class="greek">Θ</span> <span class="greek">Ψ</span> ƒ<sup>1,13</sup> 33 <span class="apparatus">M</span> lat), read <span class="greek">χρηστότερος</span> (<span class="translit">chrēstoteros</span>, “better”), a smoother reading. The reading of the text (found in <span class="apparatus">P</span><sup>4</sup> <span class="hebrew">&#8207;א&#8206;</span> B L W 1241) is preferred as the more difficult reading. This reading could suggest that the new thing Jesus brings is not even considered, since the “old wine” is already found quite acceptable.</p><p><b>tn</b> <i>Grk</i> “good.”</p><p><b>sn</b> The third illustration points out that those already satisfied with what they have will not seek the new (<i>The old is good enough</i>).</p></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
